Take a driver knowledge test: Learner’s Licence (class 7) - Government of Nova Scotia
Skip to main content
English
Français
Programs and services
Topics
Government
News
Contact us
Take a driver knowledge test: Learner’s Licence (class 7)
You need to pass a Knowledge Test before you can get a Learner’s Licence (class 7). The Knowledge Test has 2 parts – driving rules (traffic and safe driving) and road signs. After you pass the test, you need to complete additional requirements to get your licence (you can’t drive right away).
You need to pass a Knowledge Test for drivers before you can get a Learner’s Licence (class 7). You need to take the test on your own (with no help from others and no resource materials).
What you’re tested on
You need to review the Driver's Handbook to prepare for the Knowledge Test. There are 2 parts to the test:
Rules of the Road Test
Road Sign Recognition Test
The Rules of the Road Test assesses your knowledge of the traffic laws and rules for safe driving. This part of the Knowledge Test has 20 multiple-choice questions. To pass, you need to answer at least 16 correctly.
The Road Sign Recognition Test assesses your ability to recognize and understand the meaning of highway road signs. This part of the Knowledge Test has 20 multiple-choice questions. To pass, you need to answer at least 16 correctly.
Languages
Right now, the Knowledge Test is available online in English and French. If you need to take the test in another language, contact Registry of Motor Vehicles to review your options and make arrangements to take the test with an interpreter.
If you don’t pass the Knowledge Test
If you don’t pass the Knowledge Test, you need to pay for another test and take the test again.
You only need to retake the part of the Knowledge Test you didn’t pass (Rules of the Road Test or Road Sign Recognition Test). If you don’t pass both parts of the test, you need to retake both parts of the test (Rules of the Road Test and Road Sign Recognition Test).
If you take the Knowledge Test online, there’s no waiting period to retake the test (you can take the test again as soon as you're ready). If you take the test in person, you need to wait until the next day to retake the test.
When you pass the Knowledge Test
You don’t get your Learner’s Licence (class 7) as soon as you pass the Knowledge Test and you can’t drive right away. You need to visit Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia to complete the additional requirements before getting your licence.
Additional requirements to get your Learner’s Licence
To get your Learner’s Licence (class 7), you also need to:
complete and pass a vision test
provide required identification documents that show your legal name and date of birth
provide written consent from your parent or guardian (PDF) if you’re 16 or 17
pay the Learner’s Licence fee
have your photo taken
If you take the Knowledge Test online, you need to visit Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia after you pass the test to complete the additional requirements to get your licence. You don’t need to complete any of the additional requirements before you take the test.
If you take the Knowledge Test in person, you need to visit Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia before you take the test to complete and pass a vision test, provide required identification documents and provide written consent from your parent or guardian if you’re 16 or 17. You can’t take the Knowledge Test in person until you complete these requirements. After you pass the Knowledge Test, you need to pay the Learner’s Licence fee and have your photo taken.
Other licence classes
Right now, you can only take the Knowledge Test online for a Motorcycle Learner Licence, Learner’s Licence (class 7) or Farm Tractor Licence (class 8). For any other class of licence, you need to take the Knowledge Test in person.
Eligibility
You can take the Knowledge Test for a Learner’s Licence (class 7) if you meet all the following criteria:
you’re 16 or older
you have written consent from your parent or guardian to apply for a Learner’s Licence if you’re 16 or 17
you meet all the requirements to apply for a Learner’s Licence
you don’t have any outstanding fines or privilege reinstatement fees
your licence isn’t suspended and you’re not prohibited from getting a licence for any other reason
If you’re not comfortable taking a written test, contact Registry of Motor Vehicles or book an appointment at Access Nova Scotia to make arrangements to take the test verbally.
How to take the test
Review the Driver's Handbook to prepare for the Knowledge Test.
Complete the Application Information Form online.
Include payment with your form.
Submit your completed form and payment.
The service emails you a payment confirmation. Keep a copy for your records.
Once your payment is complete, you can take the test online right away. Or you can take the test online at a different time by signing in with the access code provided in your confirmation email.
How long it takes
You need to complete each part of the test within 30 minutes. You should get the test results right away. If you take the test online and your test is flagged for review, it should take 1 week to get your test results.
Cost
Activity
Fee
Knowledge Test (class 7)
$15.03
Payment options
Credit card (Visa, Mastercard, American Express, Discover), debit card, cheque, money order, cash. Make your cheque or money order payable to the Minister of Finance. Payment options may vary depending on how you take the test.
When you pay online you need to pay the fee by credit card (Visa, Mastercard, American Express, Discover, Visa Debit, Debit Mastercard).
Before you start
Make sure you:
meet the requirements to apply for a Learner’s Licence (class 7)
pay any outstanding fines or privilege reinstatement fees
Take the test online
When you take the test online you need an email address (this is where the test results are sent). You also need to have a desktop computer or laptop (you can’t take the test on a phone, tablet or other device) and a web camera connected to your computer or laptop (the camera takes photos of you throughout your test). Once you’re ready to start your test, you can take a sample test to get familiar with the online testing procedure.
Start now
Sign in with access code
Other ways to take the test
You can visit Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia to take the test in person if you’re unable to take the test online.
Related information
Book an appointment: Access Nova Scotia
Contact
Registry of Motor Vehicles
Access Nova Scotia
Related legislation
Motor Vehicle Act (PDF)
Was the information on this page helpful?
Let us know about your experience with this content
X (formerly Twitter)
YouTube
Facebook
Privacy
Terms
Crown copyright © Government of Nova Scotia