School Areas Regulations - Motor Vehicle Act (Nova Scotia)
This consolidation is unofficial and is for reference only.
For the official version of the regulations, consult the original documents on file with the Registry of Regulations , or refer to the Royal Gazette Part II .
Regulations are amended frequently.
Please check the list of Regulations by Act to see if there are any recent amendments to these regulations filed with the Registry that are not yet included in this consolidation.
Although every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of this electronic version, the Registry of Regulations assumes no responsibility for any discrepancies that may have resulted from reformatting.
This electronic version is copyright © 2011, Province of Nova Scotia , all rights reserved. It is for your personal use and may not be copied for the purposes of resale in this or any other form.
School Areas Regulations
made under subsection 103(2C) of the
Motor Vehicle Act
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 293
N.S. Reg. 164/2012 (August 21, 2012, effective September 1, 2012)
Citation
1 These regulations may be cited as the School Areas Regulations .
Definition of school area
2 (1) In Section 103 of the Motor Vehicle Act and these regulations, “school area” means
the area of a highway between
(a) a WC-1 “school area” sign and an RB-1 “maximum speed” sign below which
is placed an R102T “end school area” tab sign; or
(b) a WC-1 “school area” sign and an R-102 “end school area” sign.
(2) The references to signs in clauses (1)(a) and (b) are to the official traffic signs as
designated and described in the Traffic Signs Regulations made under the Motor
Vehicle Act .
Conditions for school area
3 (1) The reduced speed limits for a school area set out in subsection 103(2) of the Act
apply only if a child is present in the school area.
(2) A child is deemed to be present in a school area if a child is outdoors and
(a) on the highway in the school area; or
(b) on land within 30 m of the centre line of the travelled portion of the highway in
the school area.