Yield to Transit Buses Regulations - Motor Vehicle Act (Nova Scotia)
This consolidation is unofficial and is for reference only.
For the official version of the regulations, consult the original documents on file with the Registry of Regulations , or refer to the Royal Gazette Part II .
Regulations are amended frequently.
Please check the list of Regulations by Act to see if there are any recent amendments to these regulations filed with the Registry that are not yet included in this consolidation.
Although every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of this electronic version, the Registry of Regulations assumes no responsibility for any discrepancies that may have resulted from reformatting.
This electronic version is copyright © 2011, Province of Nova Scotia , all rights reserved. It is for your personal use and may not be copied for the purposes of resale in this or any other form.
Yield to Transit Buses Regulations
made under subsection 124A(5) of the
Motor Vehicle Act
R.S.N.S. 1989, c. 293
N.S. Reg. 163/2011 (March 31, 2011, effective May 1, 2011)
Citation
1 These regulations may be cited as the Yield to Transit Buses Regulations .
Definition
2 In these regulations, “Act” means the Motor Vehicle Act .
Prescribed class of transit buses
3 Transit buses operated by any of the following are prescribed as a class of transit bus for
the purpose of Section 124A of the Act:
(a) Halifax Regional Municipality;
(b) Kings Transit Authority;
(c) Strait Area Transit Co-operative Ltd;
(d) Transit Cape Breton.
Signage on transit buses
4 (1) A sign to be displayed on a transit bus for the purpose of Section 124A of the Act
must meet all of the following criteria:
(a) it must be in accordance with the depiction in Schedule A;
(b) it must be a minimum of 30 cm in height and 30 cm in width.
(2) A sign for the purpose of Section 124A of the Act must be displayed on the rear of
the transit bus immediately above the left turn signal or, if not possible, as close as
practicable to immediately above the left turn signal.
Schedule A: Yield to Transit Bus Sign