Service Nova Scotia - Registry of Motor Vehicles - Who Takes the Exam
Government Home >
Service NS Home >
Registry of Motor Vehicles - Who Takes the Exam
Fran&ccedil;ais
Service NS Home
Registry of Motor Vehicles
Licensing Services
Vehicle Registration & Plates
Customer Service Centres
Driver Exam Locations
Safety Promotions
Other Information
Schedule of Fees
Comments to RMV
Frequently Asked Questions
Related Links
What's New in RMV
About the Department
Online Services
Services en fran&ccedil;ais
Forms and Applications
Office Locations
Contact Us
Registry of Motor Vehicles - Who Takes the Exam
Every new driver and any driver who has not been licensed in Nova Scotia for three or more years must be examined by a Driver Enhancement Officer.(Examiner). Non-resident drivers (visitors) are permitted to drive in Nova Scotia for a period of 90 days if they are in possession of a valid licence from their home province or country.
If you have a Learner's Licence, you must wait 12 months from the date your Learner's licence was issued before applying for a road test. Exceptions to the 12 month waiting period are:
if you have previously held a drivers licence in Nova Scotia or an equivalent licence in another jurisdiction (province, state or country) or;
if you successfully complete a driver education/training course approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and your instructor states that you are ready to take the road test the waiting period is reduced to 9 months from the date you received your Learner's licence.
For information on Driver Examination and Testing locations and time, click here .
Examination for Learner's
Licence
In order to obtain a Learner's licence, you must be a minimum
of 16 years old and pass an examination to determine if you have the required
vision to safely operate a motor vehicle. You must also pass a written test
to prove your knowledge of road signs, rules of the road and safe driving practices.
You must present a proof of age document (birth certificate, passport, Nova
Scotia identification card, Canadian Citizenship Card, Immigration papers -
Record of Landing or Permanent Resident Card, Military identification documents
or Certificate of Indian Status Card) and two additional pieces of identification
with your signature to the Driver Enhancement staff person before a Learner's
licence will be issued.
If you are under 18 years of age, you must
have written consent of a parent or guardian before applying for a
licence. A place for your parent or guardian's signature is provided on the
application form for a Learner's licence. The parent or guardian may
withdraw this written consent at any time prior to the learner
reaching age 18 by making written application to the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles who can then cancel the Licence.
Vision Test
If your vision is found to be unacceptable for safe driving, you will
be advised accordingly. A licence cannot be issued to you until you
obtain the necessary corrective lenses. When a driver's licence is
issued, it will be endorsed "Valid only while licence holder is
wearing proper visual correction". The minimum vision requirements
are: acuity, 6/12 Snellen; field of vision, 120 degrees (total).
Road Sign Recognition Test
You will be given a written or oral examination on your ability to
recognize and understand the meaning of highway road signs. This
test consists of 20 multiple choice questions. To pass, you must
answer 16 correctly.
Rules Test
You will be given a written or oral examination on the traffic laws
and rules for safe driving as described in the Driver's Handbook. The
written exam consists of 20 multiple choice questions. To pass, you
must answer 16 correctly.
Take a driver knowledge test: Learner's Licence (class 7)
Take a driver knowledge test: Farm Tractor Licence (class 8)
Take a driver knowledge test: Motorcycle Learner Licence
Examination for Driver's
Licence
You must pass a driving
examination to determine if you are qualified to operate a motor
vehicle safely before you can be issued a driver's licence. The
examination will be conducted by a Driver Enhancement
Officer from the Registry of Motor Vehicles. The Registry has 28 Driver
Enhancement Offices located across the province.
Driving Test
This examination will test your actual driving skill. You may know
every safe driving rule, may have adequate vision and other physical
abilities, and may exhibit the most exemplary attitude. However, until
you demonstrate your ability and skill in an actual driving test, you
have not proven that you are competent to drive a motor vehicle safely
upon the highway.
Driving tests are performed by
appointment only. (See phone numbers below to book your appointment).
You must come to the examination office with a vehicle that is in good
mechanical condition, preferably the one that you expect to drive
after you obtain your drivers licence. You must have your Learner's
licence, a Road Test Receipt, a valid Motor Vehicle Permit and a valid
insurance liability card, in the vehicle owner's name, to show the Driver Enhancement Officer.
Before the road test, the vehicle will be checked by the examiner. The
road test cannot take place unless the vehicle is in good mechanical
condition and has a valid vehicle registration and safety inspection.
Before the driving test, the
Driver Enhancement Officer will give you an instruction sheet, read
this carefully before the test.
During the driving test, do not
talk unnecessarily to the examiner who will be busy giving
instructions, observing your performance and recording your score. No
tricks will be played on you. The examiner will not ask you to do
anything that is in violation of the law.
The driving test includes such operations
as:
Stopping and starting, both
on a level road and on a hill.
Changing gears in vehicles
not having automatic transmissions, both on a level road and on a
hill.
Making left and right turns.
Backing
Following another vehicle
properly.
Giving proper signals.
Parallel and /or angle
parking.
Observing and complying with
traffic control devices (signs, signals, and pavement markings)
Making lane changes
The examination will be
conducted over a course of at least 3 kilometers and, where possible,
in traffic. The exam will also test your ability to apply your
knowledge of the rules of the road, to recognize road signs, and to
react properly to actual driving conditions.
At the end of the driving test,
the Driver Enhancement Officer will tell you if you passed or failed
and will explain any areas where your driving needs improvement and
offer suggestions on how to improve.
If You Fail the Driving Test
If you do not successfully pass the driving examination, the Driver
Enhancement Officer will advise you of the reasons for your failure.
You will be advised to obtain more practice and study prior to booking
another appointment to be re-examined.
Obtaining Your Drivers Licence
After you have successfully passed the road test, the Driver Enhancement Officer will give you documentation for you to take to the nearest Registry of Motor Vehicles to have your licence upgraded to an Operator's licence (Class 5). The Registry of Motor Vehicles will give you a temporary document with the updated class and information which is valid for 30 calendar days. . You will receive your new card with the update class and information in the mail within 14 calendar days of visiting an Access Nova Scotia or Registry of Motor Vehicles Office.
Appointments for Examination
All
examination appointments, throughout the province, can be made by calling Central
Booking: 1-800-898-7668
(toll-free) or 902-424-5851.
Driver's
Licence Information Index
Back to Top of Page
Contact Us |
Privacy Policy |
Cookies |
Search |
Government Home |
Service NS Home
This page and all contents Crown copyright © 2026, Province of Nova Scotia , all rights reserved.
Please use the online inquiry form if you have any questions, comments or suggestions.