
===== PAGE 1 =====
Driving and
Impairment6
Driving and
Impairment
151

===== PAGE 2 =====
Driving and
6Impairment
This chapter contains information on various factors
that affect your ability to safely drive a motor vehicle.
152

===== PAGE 3 =====
Driving and
To operate a motor vehicle, you must be mentally alert andImpairment6
unimpaired. As a driver, you must be able to identify what is
happening around you, predict potential outcomes, make key
decisions, and respond quickly and safely.
Alcohol and Drugs
The degree to which alcohol and drugs affect you depends
on many factors: your age; gender; physical condition,
such as your height, weight, or general fitness; emotional
condition, such as depression, anger, happiness, or fatigue;
amount of food consumed; interactions with other
substances; and other factors.
Drinking and driving
Drinking and driving is a high-risk behaviour that can have
serious consequences for you, your passengers, and other
motorists or pedestrians. Alcohol
is absorbed directly into the blood
stream. This means that alcohol-
induced impairment begins with
the first drink. Legal impairment is
defined as having a blood-alcohol
content (BAC) of .08 per cent or
more. However you can be
charged and convicted below
this level if you show other
symptoms of impairment.
Don't Drink and
Drive Symbol
153

===== PAGE 4 =====
Driving and
6ImpairmentThe only way to remove alcohol from your system is
through time. Your liver breaks down alcohol at the rate
of .015 mg/hr. It takes more than one hour to eliminate
each standard drink from your system. A standard drink is
a 340 ml (12 oz.) bottle of beer, 43 ml (1.5 oz.) of spirits,
or a 142 ml (5 oz.) glass of unfortified wine. They all contain
the same amount of alcohol. Black coffee, cold showers,
or a jog around the block won’t remove the alcohol
from your system.
As the effects of alcohol start to wear off, you begin to
feel better or more in control. However, you are probably
not sober and may still be impaired. The solution?
Don’t Drink and Drive!
Getting caught
If a police officer or other peace officer reasonably suspects
that you are impaired by alcohol, you will be ordered to
supply a breath sample. There are two steps to this process.
The first is a roadside screening using the SL2 unit; the
second step, the breathalyzer test. The roadside test, which
is normally administered in the police vehicle, indicates
“pass,” “warn,” or “fail.” If the device reads “pass,”
you will be permitted to leave if there are no other
violations. If the device reads “warn,” meaning it registers a
reading between 50 mg/100 ml of blood (.05) and
80 mg/100 ml (.08), the police may issue 7-day, 15-day, or
30-day suspension of your licence based on whether or not
you had any other similar incidents in the past ten years. If
the device reads “fail,” you will be arrested. You must
accompany the police officer to the police station or a sub-
station where you will be asked to take a breathalyzer test.
It is an offence to refuse the breathalyzer or the SL2. If you
refuse, you will be charged with “failing to comply” or
“refusing the breathalyzer.”
154

===== PAGE 5 =====
Driving and
1
A surveyof Canadian drivers injured in 1994 indicated thatImpairment6
44 per cent had been drinking. Eighteen per cent had a BAC
of .01-.08 per cent. A staggering 82 per cent were legally
impaired, with 20 per cent having a BAC between .081-.149
per cent and 62 per cent having a BAC above .150 per cent.
Anyone driving at nighttime should be aware that roughly
10 per cent of those sharing the road with you have been
drinking and 3 per cent are legally impaired.
Drug impairment
Impairment can also be caused by prescription and non-
prescription medications, herbal remedies, illegal drugs,
or other substances. Drinking in combination with drugs
can be a lethal cocktail causing serious impairment.
Pay close attention to the precautions noted on all
medications that you may take before and during a planned
road trip. When in doubt, ask your pharmacist.
Some prescription and non-prescription drugs that
may affect your driving skills are
•pain killers such as codeine or other narcotics
•antidepressants such as tricyclic antidepressants
•antiemetic agents for nausea such as Gravol
•antihistamines—sinus and allergy medications
•antipsychotic drugs—major tranquillizers and similar
medications, like phenothiazines (i.e., chlorpromazine),
haloperidol
•ophthalmic preparations including eye ointments
and drops
•sedatives and anxiolytics including barbiturates,
benzodiazepines
•muscle relaxants including skeletal relaxants
1
Study of the Profile of High-Risk Drivers, Transport Canada Publication #TP-13108 E,
Authors: D.J.Bierness & H.M. Simpson, Performing Organization: Traffic Injury
Research Foundation of Canada
155

===== PAGE 6 =====
Driving and
6Impairment•antihypertensive or blood pressure medications
(usually during the first week as your body adjusts
to the new medication)
•antineoplastic agents
•chemotherapeutic agents
•immunosuppressants
•steroids
(Source:Physician’s Guide to Driver Examination)
Penalties for impaired driving
Certain driving behaviours are considered sufficiently
dangerous to be dealt with under the Criminal Code of
Canada. It is an offence to operate or have care or control
of a motor vehicle while impaired by alcohol or drugs.
The penalties for a conviction are severe, including a fine
of up to $2000 and a prison term of up to life for impaired
driving causing death. If you are convicted under the
Criminal Code of Canada, you will also be prohibited from
operating a motor vehicle anywhere in Canada for one
year to life.
Effective October
2010, any driverAdministrative Licence
with a blood-Suspension Program
The Administrative Licence Suspension Program was
alcohol content
level betweenintroduced June 1, 1995, as a further deterrent to drinking
50 mg/100 ml (.05)and driving. The program provides for an immediate three-
and 80 mg/100 mlmonth suspension of driving privileges for failing the
breathalyzer or refusing to give a breath sample.
(.08) may be
removed from the
road and suspendedThe specific objectives of the program are to
from driving for a1decrease the number of drinking drivers by providing
a strong deterrent
minimum period of
7 days.2reduce the potential for additional incidents by
immediate suspension of driving privileges
If you are charged, the police will order a three-month
suspension of your driving privileges and will issue a seven-
day temporary licence, only if you have a valid licence.
156

===== PAGE 7 =====
Driving and
Penalties in Nova Scotia for driving while impaired areImpairment6
outlined below. However, judges will make decisions
based upon the specific facts of each case. Fines will vary
between the minimum and the maximum limits. There could
also be a difference in the fine and prison term for
convictions if death or bodily harm or dangerous driving is
involved.
1st offence:
•applicable fines
•revocation (loss) of driving privileges for one year fromIf your licence is
the date of conviction
suspended or
•applicable reinstatement fees to get your licence backrevoked while
•completion of an Alcohol Assessment Program withyou are in the
Addiction Services of the District Health Authority and theGraduated Driver
submission of the applicable fees
Licensing Program,
•youmaybe required to be re-examined, includingyou will have to
written, road, and vision testsbegin the two-year
GDL Program over
2nd offence:
again after serving
•applicable finesthe suspension.
•possible prison term of at least 14 days*
•revocation (loss) of driving privileges for three years from
the date of conviction
•completion of an Alcohol Assessment Program with
Addiction Services of the District Health Authority and the
submission of the applicable fees
•applicable reinstatement fees
•youwillbe required to be re-examined, including
written, road, and vision tests
*Persons prosecuted by indictment for offences under Sections 253, 254 of the
Criminal Code (Canada) are liable to receive a prison term of up to five years.
Persons prosecuted by way of summary conviction under these sections are liable
to receive a prison term of up to six months.
157

===== PAGE 8 =====
Driving and
6Impairment3rd offence:
•applicable fines
•prison term of at least 90 days*
•revocation (loss) of driving privileges is indefinite
(minimum of ten years) from the date of conviction
•completion of an Alcohol Assessment Program with
Addiction Services of the District Health Authority and the
submission of the applicable fees
•applicable reinstatement fees
•you will be required to be re-examined, including written,
road, and vision tests
4th offence:
•permanent revocation (loss), in addition to all of the
penalties provided under theCriminal Code of Canada
Being a responsible host or hostess
When hosting a party that involves alcohol, you must
consider the safety of your guests as they return home.
Here are some suggestions for being a responsible
Friends do nothost or hostess.
let friends
drink and1Offer non-alcoholic alternatives and do not add alcohol
to the punch bowl. Never press alcoholic beverages on
drive.
any guest. Respect the wishes of any guest who says,
“No, thanks.”
2Serve snack foods early in the evening, as food tends
to slow down the absorption of alcohol.
3As part of your party routine, close the bar an hour or
so before guests are expected to leave and serve
non-alcoholic beverages.
4Support the Designated Driver Program by encouraging
individuals to remain alcohol- and drug-free during the
social event. Make sure that group members are driven
home by a designated driver, or arrange other safe
transportation.
158

===== PAGE 9 =====
Driving and
Being in Shape to Drive:Impairment6
Physically and Mentally
Guidelines for issuing a licence
Service Nova Scotia manages the driver-licensing program
that ensures road safety. We consider both the needs and
safety of the general public and the needs and rights of
individual drivers to get around and to travel. Through the
use of our licence classification system, conditional and
restricted licences, and the approval of modified (specially
equipped) vehicles, Nova Scotians are able to get and keep
their driving privileges as long as it is safe to do so.
The department is responsible for establishing the
qualifications of competency and fitness for drivers when
issuing and renewing driver’s licences. Every person wishing
to obtain a driver’s licence in Nova Scotia must be able to
demonstrate reasonable and ordinary control while
operating a vehicle. This includes an understanding of traffic
signs and signals and the rules of the road. We may refuse
to issue or renew a driver’s licence to any person if there
are identified concerns with their ability to operate
a motor vehicle.
159

===== PAGE 10 =====
Driving and
6ImpairmentHealth guidelines
If you have any medical condition that may interfere with
the safe operation of a motor vehicle, you may need to see
a physician for a Driver’s Medical Examination Report.
This report provides detailed information on the following:
•visual acuity/field of vision
•substance abuse
•drug usage
•cerebrovascular diseases
•diseases of the nervous system
•metabolic diseases (including diabetes)
•musculoskeletal disabilities
•cardiovascular diseases
•respiratory diseases
•peripheral vascular diseases
•psychiatric disorders
•hearing
The costs associated with this report are your responsibility.
We will review the report in confidence, and may refer it to
the Medical Advisory Committee on Driver Licensing.
Reference will be made to the Canadian Medical
Association, A Guide for Physicians Determining Fitness to
Drive and the Canadian Council of Motor Transport
Administrator’s Medical Standards for Drivers.
All commercial drivers must file a medical report upon initial
application, and every five years thereafter upon renewal,
until the age of 64, then annually thereafter.
160

===== PAGE 11 =====
Driving and
Emotional and physical stressImpairment6
Strong emotions and driving do not mix well. Mistakes can
and do happen, but they can be prevented. Here are a few
tips to help you manage the effects of emotions and stress
on your driving:
•If you are under emotional or physical stress, avoid
driving and choose another competent driver.
•If you are angry or excited, take a deep breath and,
if necessary, take a short walk. Stay off the road until
you can give driving your full attention.
•If you are worried, feeling down, or are upset about
something, put these emotions aside and concentrate
on your driving.
•If a quarrel develops among passengers while driving,
safely move the vehicle off the roadway so that you can
calmly deal with the situation.
•If you tend to be impatient, develop a set of relaxing
routines, and give yourself extra time for your driving trip.
Driving aggressively at faster speeds will not get you to
your destination sooner.For your own
•Remember, driving a motor vehicle is a responsibility notsafety and the
to be taken lightly. Full attention and concentration aresafety of other
necessary to perform the complex maneuvers necessarydrivers, drive as
to operate a motor vehicle safely.
if your life
depends on it
—because it
does!
161

===== PAGE 12 =====
Driving and
6ImpairmentVision
A new driver must pass a vision test before participating in
a road test. Your vision must be acceptable by Canadian
standards before you are allowed on the road. If you think
you need visual correction, see an eye specialist. Bring your
visual correction with you when you come to complete the
driver’s test. We accept the professional opinions of
ophthalmologists and optometrists. Higher classes of licence
require higher vision standards.
For Class 1, 2, and 4 licences
Applicants for Class 1, 2, or 4 licences must have vision in
both eyes and an acuity of not less than 20/50 (6/15) in the
poorest eye and 20/30 (6/9) in the better eye, with or
without visual correction. You must be able to see from side
to side not less than 120 degrees, in each eye examined
separately (field of vision), and double vision must
not be detected.
For Class 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 licences
Applicants for Class 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 licences must have
a visual acuity of not less than 20/40 (6/12) in at least one
eye and a field of vision of not less than 120 degrees with
both eyes open and examined together.
Hearing
When operating a commercial vehicle carrying passengers
or dangerous goods, you must be capable of hearing
a forced whisper at 5 feet in the better ear.
162

===== PAGE 13 =====
Driving and
Driver fatigueImpairment6
It is unwise and unsafe to drive when you are overtired.
You could easily experience highway hypnosis, which causes
you to feel disoriented and drowsy, and you could even fall
asleep at the wheel. Never use cruise control when you are
overtired. You must be mentally alert and prepared to react
in an instant in an emergency situation.
You are the best judge of how you are feeling. Don’t overdo
it. Know when to pull over and stop driving.
Remember
Good health is an important ingredient to a safe driver.
Should you feel the need to assess health issues and driving
please consult your family physician.
163