
===== PAGE 1 =====
Rules
of the
Road2
Rules of
the Road
37

===== PAGE 2 =====
Rules
of the
2Road
This chapter explains the rules of the road including
information about
• traffic control signals
• basic driving rules
• parking and stopping
• backing
• encountering other road users
38

===== PAGE 3 =====
Rules
of the
Traffic ControlRoad2
Vehicle and pedestrian traffic is controlled by a series of
traffic signal lights, traffic signs, and pavement markings.
The local traffic authority is responsible for traffic in cities
or towns, while the provincial traffic authority is responsible
for all other roadways in the province.
Traffic signal lights
Traffic signal lights control vehicle and pedestrian traffic at
some intersections.
•A green signal light means that, when it is safe, you may
go unless otherwise directed by a traffic sign or a peace
officer. You must yield the right of way to pedestrians in
the crosswalk, including persons in wheelchairs. You must
also yield to other vehicles in the intersection or those
approaching so closely as to be an immediate hazard.
For vehicles turning left at a green signal light, you must
yield the right of way to oncoming vehicles and any
pedestrians that may be in your path.
•A yellow or amber signal light
means that you must stop before
entering the intersection, if you
can stop safely.
•A red signal light means that all
traffic facing this signal must stop at
the place marked or at the nearest
side of the crosswalk.
If the traffic signal lights are not working,
treat the intersection as a multi-stop.
Come to a full stop, then proceed when
you have the right of way and it is safe to do so.Green, Yellow, and
See page 44 for right-of-way rules at an intersection.Red Signal Lights
39

===== PAGE 4 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadTips:
• Stop for a yellow signal unless you are too close
to the intersection to stop safely. In that case, drive
cautiously through the intersection.
• Never speed up for a yellow signal to “beat"
the red signal.
• Unless there is a sign showing “no turn on red,”
you may turn right on red after stopping and
making sure that you can turn safely.
• It is illegal to make a left turn on a red light, except
for left turns at a red light from a one-way street to
another one-way street.
Arrow signals
Arrow signal lights control turning at some inter-
sections. When facing a green signal light and a green
arrow, turning traffic is controlled by the arrow signals
Green and Yellowand through traffic is controlled by the green signal
Arrow Signallights.
• A green arrow means that you can turn in the
Lights
direction of the arrow and proceed through
the intersection.
• A yellow arrow means that you should stop, unless
you are too close to the intersection
to stop safely.
In that case, drive cautiously
through the intersection.
Flashing signals
•The flashing red signal has
the same meaning as the stop
sign: Stop and do not go until
you can enter the intersection
without interfering with
approaching traffic.
•The flashing yellow or amber signal has the same
Flashing Red,meaning as a warning sign: Slow down and proceed with
Yellow, and Greencaution.
Signal Lights
40

===== PAGE 5 =====
Rules
of the
•The flashing green signal means that facing trafficRoad2
may turn left, go straight ahead, or turn right.
Lane control signals
Some traffic lanes are controlled by special lane-control
signal lights. These are used on some commuter routes when
the direction of heaviest traffic changes throughout the day.
The lights are mounted directly over the lane that they
control. Never drive in a lane under a red X signal,
regardless of any other signs or signals. You may drive
in lanes underneath a green signal, but you must obey
all other signs and signals.
Traffic signs
Traffic signs and pavement
markings regulate the flow
of traffic, warn you of conditions
on the road ahead, and inform
you about routes and distances.
It is important to know the shapes
of the signs and to understand
their meanings. See Section 3 for
information about signs.
Lane Control
Signal Lights
41

===== PAGE 6 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadCrosswalk guards
Crosswalk guards direct the movement of children along or
across highways going to or from school. They signal drivers
to stop by holding up a stop sign (paddle) facing the vehicle.
Drivers must obey crossing guards appointed and employed
for this purpose. Failure to do so could mean demerit points
on your driving record.
Right of way
An intersection is any place where two or more roads meet
or cross each other, marked and unmarked. Both vehicles
and pedestrians must manage
to pass through this common
meeting place. With more than
half of all traffic collisions
occurring at intersections,
it is important to know and
understand the rules of the road.
The rules of the road are set
out in the Motor Vehicle Act
and its associated regulations.
Pedestrian at anThese rules are designed to
Intersection With aensure driver and pedestrian
safety. Drive defensively,
Marked Crosswalk
and be prepared to yield
the right of way.
Unmarked crosswalks
Every intersection has a
crosswalk. Many are unmarked.
Drivers must yield to pedestrians
at all intersections, whether
crosswalks are marked or
unmarked.
Pedestrian at an
Intersection With
an Unmarked
Crosswalk
42

===== PAGE 7 =====
Rules
of the
Refer to the following situations:Road2
•At intersections without traffic signals, pedestrians have
the right of way if they are in marked crosswalks or in
unmarked crosswalks formed
by imaginary lines extending
across the streets.
•At intersections controlled by
traffic signals, pedestrians
must obey the same signals as
drivers travelling in the same
direction. Pedestrians should
not start to cross during a red
or yellow signal.
•When crossing with a green
signal, pedestrians have the
right of way over all vehicles,Intersection,
including those turning across the pathsGreen Signal,
of the pedestrians.Turning Right
•If you are moving through an intersection with a green
signal, make sure you look in all directions to make sure
all pedestrians have finished their crossing.
•If a traffic signal changes to yellow or red while a
pedestrian remains in the street, you must allow the
pedestrian to complete the crossing safely.
•At some intersections, special signals instruct pedestrians
either to “Walk" or “Don't Walk." When these signals
are operating, pedestrians must obey them rather than
regular traffic signals. Pedestrians crossing with the
“Walk” signal have the right of way just as they do while
crossing with a green light.
Pedestrian Signal
Lights
43

===== PAGE 8 =====
Rules
of the
2Road•The vehicle already in the intersection has the right
of way ahead of any car that has not yet entered
the intersection.
• When two facing vehicles
approach an intersection at
the same time, both drivers
can move straight ahead or
turn right. If one driver is going
straight while the other wants
to turn left, the driver who
wants to turn left must yield
the right of way and wait
until the turn can be made
safely.
Intersection Right• When two or more vehicles
reach an intersection at the same time, the car to the left
of Way - Vehicle
already inmust yield the right of way.
intersection•Regardless of the “right of way” you feel you have,
always be 100 per cent ready to yield to any oncoming
vehicles when approaching an intersection if it will avoid
a collision.
•Do not pass any vehicle that is stopped at a crosswalk to
allow a pedestrian to cross the street.
Tips:
•Make a proper lane change before entering the
intersection. Never change lanes while you are moving
through an intersection.
•When making a left turn, do not turn your wheels to
the left until you are sure you can complete the turn.
A collision could push your vehicle into oncoming traffic.
Keep your wheels straight.
44

===== PAGE 9 =====
Rules
of the
•Before starting, stopping, or turning, check to makeRoad2
sure that this can be done safely.
•When leaving a private driveway or parking lot, stop and
yield the right of way to all
other vehicles and pedestrians.
Emergency vehicles
Drivers of emergency vehicles and
other vehicle drivers must share the
responsibility of helping to deal
with emergencies. Police cars,
ambulances, and fire department
vehicles with flashing lights and
sirens have the right of way.
Intersection Right
Follow these guidelines when approaching or being
of Way - Vehicles
approached by an emergency vehicle:reach at the
•As the emergency vehicle approaches from ahead orsame time
behind, move to the right edge or curb of the road and
stop completely.
•Remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed,
or until you are directed to move
by a peace officer.
•Never follow an emergency fire
vehicle within 150 metres.
•Never drive or park within 150
metres of an emergency vehicle
that has stopped to investigate
a collision or to give assistance.
•Never drive a motor vehicle over
a fire hose unless instructed to
do so by a police officer or
a firefighter.
Emergency
Vehicles
45

===== PAGE 10 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadBasic Rules
Driving on the right
Drivers must drive on the right side of the road except
when passing, turning left, or avoiding an obstruction.
Slow-moving traffic must drive as closely as possible to
the right edge or curb of the highway unless it is not
practical to do so.
Do not hug the centre line as it poses a greater risk of
head-on collision. Drive entirely or as nearly as is practical
within a single lane. Don’t move from that lane until it is
safe to do so.
On a multi-lane highway slower vehicles should travel in the
right lane. Driving at the speed limit doesn’t entitle you to
“camp” in the left lane which
means to stay in the lane
indefinitely. The left lane is a
transition lane designed for
passing. If you remain in the left
lane, other drivers may try to pass
you on the right. Passing on the
right is not as safe as on the
left because it is much more
difficult to predict what everyone
is going to do.
Driving on the
Right
46

===== PAGE 11 =====
Rules
of the
Stopping distancesRoad2
The speed at which you drive
determines the distance required toYellow indicates
stop your vehicle. Stopping distance
reaction distance.
also depends on your reaction time.Red indicates
Stopping distances are longer atbraking distance.
higher speeds because your vehicle
travels farther during your reaction
50 km per hour
time, and it takes more brakingReaction
distance to come to a full stop.Distance 35 m
Even in ideal conditions, if you areBraking
travelling at 80 km/h, your vehicle
Distance 28 m
requires more than 140 metresTotal Stopping
(460 feet) to stop completely.Distance 63 m
Driving at high speeds is more
80 km per hour
dangerous. With each additionalReaction
kilometre travelled per hour, youDistance 56 m
reduce your ability to control theBraking
vehicle. Speed also increases the
Distance 84 m
likelihood that a crash will causeTotal Stopping
serious injury or death.Distance 140 m
Driving too slowly
100 km per hour
Driving below the posted speedReaction
limit in ideal conditions can also beDistance 69 m
dangerous. Studies show that a vehicle moving at a speedBraking
considerably below the posted limit is much more likely to
Distance 136 m
cause or be involved in a crash than a vehicle movingTotal Stopping
at a normal speed.Distance 205 m
110 km per hour
Reaction
Distance 76 m
Braking
Distance 170 m
Total Stopping
Distance 246 m
47

===== PAGE 12 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadDriving slowly is especially dangerous just beyond the crest
of a hill or around a curve. The slowly moving vehicle is
often hidden by the hill or curve. Faster-moving vehicles
may crash into the slower-moving vehicles before they
can slow down.
You should not drive your vehicle at such a slow speed as
to block the normal and reasonable flow of traffic. A slow
driver must stop where it is safe to do so and allow blocked
traffic to pass. Once the blocked traffic has passed, the slow
driver may resume driving until the following traffic begins
to build up.
Using the safety scan
A safety scan is your best defence for avoiding hazards and
other dangers. This means frequently moving your head and
your eyes to check what is happening all around your
vehicle. Frequently check the rearview and sideview mirrors,
and be sure to do a shoulder check for your blind spots,
especially before turning or
changing lanes.
Blind spots
Rear and side view mirrors assist
you in seeing what is behind your
vehicle. However, there is an area
on each side that you cannot see
with your mirrors. These are called
blind spots. They are usually to the
back left and back right of your
vehicle. You may not see people,
vehicles, or other objects when
they are in these spots. Make it
Blind Spotsa practice to turn your head to look over your shoulder
checking your blind spots. It is particularly important to
check your blind spots before changing lanes or turning.
48

===== PAGE 13 =====
Rules
of the
Two-second ruleRoad2
Whenever you are following other vehicles in traffic you
should allow enough space to stop safely if the vehicle in
front stops suddenly. One way to judge a safe following
distance is to use the “two-second rule.”
1Pick a landmark on the side of the highway ahead,
such as a road sign or power pole.
2When the vehicle you are following passes the landmark,
count “one thousand and one, one thousand and two.”
3When your vehicle reaches the landmark stop counting.
If you reach the landmark before you count “one
thousand and two,” you are following too close to
the vehicle in front of you.
Although the two-second rule is sufficient for most driving
situations, it is important to allow more distance on slippery
roads or when your visibility is reduced by fog, rain, snow,
or the glare of the sun, or when following large commercial
vehicles that block your view of the road ahead.
You should also increase the
distance between your vehicle and
the one ahead of you if you are
carrying a heavy load. Carrying a
heavy load will increase your
stopping distance. You should also
increase the distance between your
vehicle and a smaller vehicle such
as a motorcycle which can stop
more quickly than you.Two-Second Rule
49

===== PAGE 14 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadChoosing a safe speed
Despite posted speed limits, you must drive at a speed and
in a manner that will not endanger the life, limb, or property
of others. You must consider all circumstances including
general visibility, the weather, heavy traffic, and whether
the road is wet or slippery.
•Never drive faster than the posted speed limit
or at a speed that is not reasonable for the
prevailing conditions.
•Allow a safe distance between you and the vehicle in
front of you. Follow the two-second rule.
•The faster you are moving, the farther ahead you must
be able to see to allow enough distance for stopping.
Conditions often change as you drive. You will drive
through different areas such as open country, residential
communities, and school zones. Watch for changing
conditions and adjust your speed accordingly. Be extremely
careful when driving through highway construction zones.
Reduce your speed when workers are present.
Unless otherwise posted, the maximum speed permitted
on any highway in Nova Scotia is 80 km/h. In business and
residential districts the speed limit is 50 km/h. Regardless
of posted speed limits, your speed must be reasonable and
prudent and must take into account the traffic, the surface
and width of the highway, and all driving conditions
existing at the time.
50

===== PAGE 15 =====
Rules
of the
The following is a list of situations where the maximumRoad2
speed limit is set at 50 km/h:
•when passing a school building or grounds during school
recess, while children are going to or leaving school
during opening or closing hours, or any other time that
children are present where the speed limit prior to
entering the School Zone is greater than 50 km/h
•when passing a church while the congregation
is entering or leaving the church
•within 15 metres of an intersection where your view
is reduced to less than 60 metres in either direction along
any intersecting highway. The exception to this would be
when travelling upon a through street or highway or at
traffic-controlled intersections
•in public parks within cities or towns, unless another rate
of speed is posted
•when approaching within 30 metres of a railway crossing
•in a residential district
•in a business district
•in a danger zone
School zone
When children are present in a school zone, it is an offence to
drive in excess of 30 km/h in areas where the approaching
speed limit is 50km/h, or 50km/h where the approaching
speed limit is higher than 50km/h whatever the time of day.
Curves or sharp turns
Your moving vehicle develops a force called momentum.
The higher the speed, the greater the force. When you enter
a curve, the momentum converts to centrifugal force. This
means that the force pushes your vehicle away from the
centre of the curve. Excessive speed, poor traction, or poor
conditions while steering through a curve could cause you
to skid and to lose control.
51

===== PAGE 16 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadThe proper driving speed at which you should enter a curve
depends on the sharpness of the curve, the road’s surface,
the current driving conditions, and the condition of your
vehicle and tires. Warning signs mark many curves on the
highway where you should reduce your speed. While most
curves without warning signs may be safe to enter at the
posted speed limit, some may not.
As you approach an unfamiliar
curve assess the situation. Make
note of the sharpness of the curve
and whether you can see all the
way through.
Rounding a Curve:As you approach a curve
1 Slow down/•reduce your speed so that you enter the curve at a speed
that will allow you to avoid additional braking
downshift as you
enter the curve•at the midpoint of the curve, gradually accelerate
2 Maintain slowerto create a positive force, pulling you smoothly
speedthrough the curve
•stay on your side of the road and drive as far to the right
3 Gently increase
your speedas you can for curves to the right, and in the middle of
your lane for curves to the left
Collisions can occur when you enter the curve too fast and
are forced to brake in the curve. If the road is slippery,
a slight force could be enough to cause a skid and push
your car off the road. Never stop, park, or make a U-turn
in a curve. Since curves (and hills) obstruct the view of the
road, do not pass or back up within a curve.
52

===== PAGE 17 =====
Rules
of the
Using your signal lights and hornRoad2
Your vehicle must be equipped with signal lights that are
working properly and a horn that is in good working order.
Before starting, stopping, or turning, check to see that you
can do so safely. Use your signal lights to show your driving
intentions to other vehicles. When a pedestrian or another
vehicle may be affected, you must sound your horn.
The sound must be clearly audible to pedestrians
Left Turn
and other drivers.
You may use hand-and-arm signals, but do so
cautiously. Hand-and-arm signals may not be
seen as readily as vehicle signals.
If the construction of your vehicle or the load it is
carrying limits the visibility of hand-and-arm
signals, then you must use signal lights.
Right Turn
Specifically, the Motor Vehicle Act says that you
must use signal lights if any portion of the
vehicle, or the load on the vehicle, extends more
than 60 cm to the left of the centre of the vehicle’s
steering wheel.
Signalling does not give you the right of way.
You must make sure the way is clear and safe.
Slowing Down/Stopping
Hand Signals and
Signal Lights
53

===== PAGE 18 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadTurning
Reduce speed before making turns, do a shoulder check,
yield the right of way, and then accelerate slightly. For right
turns, you must wait for pedestrians to cross if they are
in your path. Stay close to the
right-hand edge of the road
so that another vehicle cannot
move between your vehicle
and the curb.
If you intend to turn left, you must
first yield to approaching vehicles
and then, when the way is clear,
complete the turn. You must wait
for pedestrians to cross if they
are in your path.
Wheel positionIf you are stopped in position to
while turning leftmake a left turn and are waiting for opposing
traffic, do not turn the steering wheel to the left
until you are sure you can complete the turn.
If you are struck from the rear while stopped
with the wheels turned to the left, your vehicle
may be pushed into opposing traffic and
cause another collision.
Do not turn from a direct course unless the turn
is allowed and it can be made safely.
One-way road to
a two-way road.Motorcycles and bicycles are especially hard to see during
Turn from the lefta turn. Always give a proper signal. Do a safety scan.
Make the turn only when it is safe to do so.
curb lane to the
lane just right of
the centre line.
Then, when you
can, move into the
right curb lane.
54

===== PAGE 19 =====
Rules
of the
Here are some tips to make turns legally and safely:Road2
•Prepare for the turn before you get there.
Decide in advance where you want to turn.
If you are not sure, drive slowly until you can
read the street signs or markers or decide
the direction you wish to turn. Don't make
last-minute turns. They are dangerous.
•Signal your intention to change lanes
and turn.
•Move into the correct lane as traffic permits,
especially in fast-moving or heavy traffic.Two-way road to
•Look behind and on both sides to see where
a two-way road.
other traffic may be so that you can changeTurn from the lane
lanes and make the turn safely.closest to the
•To make the turn safely, slow down before you reach thecentre line into the
crosswalk and maintain a safe speed as you complete the
lane right of the
turn. Do not use the brake or clutch pedal while turning.centre line. Then,
Do not shift gears after entering the intersection.when you can,
•Make the turn correctly. This will be easy if you are inmove into the right
the proper lane and are travelling slowly enough when
curb lane.
you start the turn.
•Finish your turn at intersections in the
proper lane. If there are two turning lanes,
stay in the lane that you are in from the
beginning to the end of the turn. For
instance, if you begin turning in the right
turning lane, you will enter the next
roadway in the right receiving lane
(refer to illustrations).
•Exceptions apply to large commercial
vehicles that require sufficient room toTwo-way road to
make the turn safely. Be aware that large
a one-way road.
commercial vehicles sometimes requireTurn from the lane
wide right turns.closest to the
centre line into the
left curb lane.
55

===== PAGE 20 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadFollowing
Following too closely is a leading cause of traffic collisions.
Maintain plenty of space between your vehicle and the one
ahead. If the vehicle ahead stops suddenly, you will need
time to react. On the open road, keep enough distance
between you and the vehicle ahead so that a passing vehicle
can safely move into and occupy the space. Remember to
use the two-second rule.
Changing lanes
On a highway with multiple lanes
of traffic, do a safety scan to check
your blind spots. Check the lane
you are changing to and the next
lane beyond that, to be certain that
another vehicle is not planning to
move into the same space.
Here are the steps for making a lane
change:
1 Check your mirrors for a safe spot in the
traffic where you can enter.
2 Check your blind spot by looking over
your shoulder in the direction of the lane
change. Use your signal light to indicate
which direction you will be moving.
3 Check again to be certain that no vehicle
is approaching too fast from behind.
4 Steer gradually into the new lane. Do not
slow down, but maintain the same speed
or gently increase it.
56

===== PAGE 21 =====
Rules
of the
Overtaking and passingRoad2
You must signal your intention to pass and sound your horn
before overtaking and passing
another vehicle. The horn signal
places the driver of the vehicle
you are passing under a legal
obligation to help you to pass.
The driver of the vehicle being
overtaken must give way to the
passing vehicle. The vehicle being
passed must not increase speed
until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
On roadways with two-way traffic,
you must take precautions in order to pass safely. Take thePassing,
time to determine if there is sufficient distance ahead toSignal Intention,
pass without disrupting the safe operation of approachingSound Horn
vehicles. The left side of the highway must be clearly visible
and free of oncoming traffic. You must pass to the left of
the vehicle you are overtaking
and return to the right when the
lane is clear and it is safe to do
so. Whenever there are only two
lanes, never follow another
vehicle that has already begun to
pass a slower-moving vehicle.
Wait for the first vehicle to pass
safely and then proceed.
When passing at night, use low-
beam headlights until you have
completed your pass.
Passing at Night
57

===== PAGE 22 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadMany serious collisions are caused by improper passing.
Take every precaution and make sure you are in a
passing zone and that it is safe to pass. Here are some
tips to consider:
•Is passing necessary? Often very little is to be gained by
passing another vehicle. Experienced drivers will tell you
that over a 100-km stretch of highway, aggressive driving
will decrease driving time by less than two minutes while
substantially increasing the risk of a collision.
•Stay back. Moving up closely behind another vehicle
reduces your stopping distance and can obscure your
vision, making it unsafe to pass.
•Drive defensively, checking for other vehicles that
may be passing.
•Do a safety scan, looking ahead and behind to determine
when it is safe to pass.
•If it is safe to pass, signal your intention to pass to alert
the drivers ahead and behind you to enable them to plan
their moves accordingly.
•Check your blind spot by looking over your left shoulder
(chin to shoulder).
•Move left gradually.
•Accelerate, but do not exceed the posted speed limit.
•As required by law, sound your horn when you reach
the rear of the vehicle you are overtaking.
•Turn your right signal on after you have passed. Look
over your right shoulder (chin to shoulder).
•Move right when the headlights of the vehicle you have
passed are visible in your rearview mirror.
•Resume normal speed. Turn off your signal light.
You have not passed safely if the vehicle you have passed
must slow down to allow you back into your correct lane.
58

===== PAGE 23 =====
Rules
of the
Places where passing is always unsafe and usually illegal:Road2
•at intersections in cities and towns or at railway crossings
•at marked intersections in rural areas
•on any curve or hill where you cannot see at least
150 metres ahead
•wherever there is a solid yellow line in the driver’s lane
combined with a broken line in the approaching lane
•wherever there is a double solid yellow line
•at intersections or crosswalks where a car has stopped
to yield to pedestrians
•wherever you cannot see far enough ahead to pass safely
Passing on the right
On a multi-lane highway, operating a vehicle at the speed
limit doesn’t entitle you to remain in the left lane
indefinitely. You should generally travel in the right lane.
On highways with two or more substantially continuous
lanes, you may pass another vehicle from the right or left.
In this instance you may pass another vehicle on the right
if that vehicle is making a left turn. Passing on the right
places your vehicle on the blind side of the car you are
passing. The car you are passing could unexpectedly make
a right turn or pull over to the right side of the road.
When your vehicle is being passed
When you are being passed, you must help the other driver
to pass. If the driver of the passing car blows the horn,
move to the right edge of the pavement. Never increase
your speed.
59

===== PAGE 24 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadBacking
Never back up unless you can do so safely. Watch for
children or objects which may be hidden from view once
you’re sitting behind the wheel.
Shift the car into reverse with
your foot on the brake. Hold the
steering wheel firmly with one
hand in the 12 o’clock position.
This way you can do a safety scan
over both shoulders. Whether you
are backing straight or to the
right or left, turn your body and
head to the right and look back
over your right shoulder. Your left
hand will be in the 12 o’clock
position on the steering wheel.
Begin backing slowly. Within the
first few feet, check to see that
the front end of your vehicle does
not hit anything. Make steering
adjustments as necessary.
Continue to scan in all directions.
You may remove your seat belt
to turn your body to see properly
when backing. Don’t forget to
Safety Scanfasten your seat belt again before
moving forward.
Backing Up
60

===== PAGE 25 =====
Rules
of the
Parking and stoppingRoad2
There are many rules relating to parking. Obey signs that
restrict stopping, standing, or parking, but be aware that
not all parking by-laws are posted on signs.
If it is necessary to stop, make sure that your vehicle is clear
of the travelled portion of the highway. You may not park
a vehicle on a street or highway for a period longer than
24 hours. Whenever your vehicle is left standing unattended,
apply the parking brake and turn off the engine. Curbside
wheels must be within 15 centimetres of the curb or edge
of the road.
Your vehicle is considered stopped or parked if it is occupied
or unoccupied and not moving. You may not stop or park a
vehicle in any of the following places:
•on the crest of a hill or on a curve where the view of an
approaching driver is obstructed
•where you will block a vehicle already parked, or where
you will block a sidewalk, pedestrian crossing, road
entrance, or private driveway
•within 5 metres of a crosswalk
•within 5 metres of a fire hydrant or driveway entrance
to a fire station
•within 7.5 metres of an intersection
•within 10 metres of the approach to any official flashing
beacon, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal
located at the side of the roadway
•within 15 metres of the nearest rail of a railway crossing
•alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation
or obstruction when the stopping, standing, or parking
would obstruct traffic
•on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped. This is called
double parking
•in a space designated for “Persons with Mobility
Disability” unless you have a permit or special plate
61

===== PAGE 26 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadParallel parking
If you are parking, turn on your appropriate signal and slow
down. You may have to come to a complete stop early
to force the vehicles behind you to stop back far enough
so that you can park safely.
1Then slowly proceed parallel to and approximately one
metre from the side of the parked vehicle until the rear
bumpers are even.
2Do a safety scan. When it is safe, back slowly, turning
the steering wheel sharply to the right until your vehicle
is at a 40° angle, or until the centre of the rear window
is in line with the point between the curb and the
car behind.
3Straighten your wheels and back slowly until your front
bumper is clear of the parked vehicle.
4Turn the steering wheel sharply in the opposite direction
and slowly edge the car parallel to the curb.
5Straighten your wheels and move forward or backward
until your vehicle is centred in the parking space.
Curbside wheels must be within 15 centimetres of the
curb or edge of the road.
When you are properly parked,
set the parking brake and move
the gear selector into park and
turn off your engine. For a manual
transmission, shift into reverse
if parked facing downhill or
first if parked facing uphill.
Remember to remove the key
from the ignition. Check for
traffic before opening your door.
Lock your vehicle.
Parallel ParkingIf you are driving and notice that a car ahead of you is
pulling out from a parallel parking space, slow down and be
prepared to stop.
62

===== PAGE 27 =====
Rules
of the
Angle parkingRoad2
Angle parking is commonly used in parking lots, at shopping
centres, and on very wide streets. Steps to complete angle
parking:
1Signal your intention to park and slow down.
2Remain parallel to the curb at least 1.5 metres out from
the other parked cars.
3When your front end is even with the rear of the parking
space, move slowly while turning the steering wheel
to the right.
4Straighten your wheels, trying to position the vehicle
in the centre of the parking space.
5Continue forward until the front of your car lines
up with other parked cars or until the front wheels
barely touch the curb.
When leaving an angled parking space, do a safety scan
and remember to do a number of shoulder checks while
backing. Watch your front end to avoid hitting anything.
Back out straight all the way until the front end of your
vehicle is clear of adjacent parked vehicles.
63

===== PAGE 28 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadParking on a hill
When parking on a hill or grade, turn the front wheels so
that if your vehicle rolls away, it will roll into the curb and
stop. Apply parking brake and
then place shift lever in park
position. When parking without
a curb, turn your wheels so that
the vehicle will roll off the
highway rather than into traffic.
For facing downhill with or
without a curb, turn your wheels
to the right. For facing uphill with
a curb, turn your wheels to the
left and for uphill without a curb,
turn your wheels to the right.
The curbside wheels must be
within 15 cm of the curb or edge
of the roadway.
Travelling through
roundabouts and
rotaries
Parking on a HillRoundabouts and rotaries are
specially designed intersections with traffic circulating
around a central island. Vehicles entering the roundabout or
rotary must yield to traffic in the circle. Drivers in the circle
have right of way over entering traffic. Motorists must
always yield to pedestrians who are legally crossing the road
and be courteous towards cyclists who are sharing the road.
Slow down as you approach the intersection; roundabouts
are designed for speeds of 30–50 km/h. Follow directions on
signs or pavement markings about which lane to use. Enter
the roundabout or rotary when there is a gap in traffic.
Watch for vehicles already on the roundabout or rotary;
be aware that they may not be signaling correctly or at all.
64

===== PAGE 29 =====
Rules
of the
All vehicles in the roundabout or rotary must travel to theRoad2
right around the central island. Drive around the circle in
a counterclockwise direction until you come to the road
or street where you want to exit. To leave the roundabout
or rotary, activate your turn signal and exit to the right.
If there is more than one lane in the circle, safely move into
the correct lane before you come to the place where you
intend to exit the circle. Look, signal, and use caution as you
change lanes and leave the circle. Never exit a roundabout
or rotary from an inside lane.
These rules apply unless the roundabout or rotary is
controlled by other signs or traffic signals.
Entering and leaving driveways
When entering or leaving driveways, you must yield the right
of way to pedestrians crossing in front of you and to all
vehicles approaching on the street.
Before emerging from an alley,
driveway, or building in a business
or residential district, you must
stop your vehicle immediately
before driving on the sidewalk or
on the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway.
Entering and
Leaving Driveways
65

===== PAGE 30 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadUsing controlled-access highways
The provincial 100-series highways are designed for more
convenient and safer driving. These highways are being
upgraded as divided multi-lane roadways with restricted
or limited access. Controlled access is permitted at specially
designed intersections called interchanges.
These areas require the driver’s
full attention because one group
of drivers is slowing down to exit
the controlled-access highway
while, at the same time, another
group is speeding up to enter the
same highway. Use extreme
caution in these zones to ensure
a safe and proper manoeuvre for
all involved vehicles. Signs will be
posted to inform you whether to
merge, yield, or stop. In all these
situations, you will be required to
yield to through traffic until a safe
gap can be identified before
you enter the highway.
As you approach an interchange,
give careful attention to the
Entrance and Exitdirections on the roadway signs leading up to the
interchange.
Ramp to Highway
Tips
When driving on controlled-access highways,
follow these rules:
•Plan your trip in advance.
•Be sure to check the vehicle’s water, oil, tires, and
gas before leaving on your trip.
•Decide in advance where you must enter and exit the
highway.
66

===== PAGE 31 =====
Rules
of the
•When entering the highway,use the acceleration laneRoad2
until your vehicle’s speed matches that of the other
traffic, and then merge safely.
•Keep to the right, and use the left lanes for passing only.
•Maintain a minimum two-second following distance, and
do not tailgate. One of the most frequent types of
crashes on major highways is the rear-end crash.
•Remember that faster speeds require greater stopping
distances and times.
•Stop at indicated rest areas frequently, preferably at least
once every 150–200 km.
•Never stop in the traffic lane.
•If a vehicle breakdown forces you to stop, move far off
the road. Tie a white cloth on the radio aerial or left
door handle. If the breakdown occurs at night, engage
the vehicle’s emergency flashers or parking lights.
(If you are a driver who spots a vehicle in distress,
contact the police.)
•When leaving the highway, signal your turn well in
advance, and, without slowing down, enter the
deceleration lane. Slow down and proceed at the posted
ramp speed limit. Most exit ramps are to the right.
Changes in direction are then made where the exit ramp
intersects another roadway.
•Be aware of cars in the lanes next to you.
Drivers and large commercial vehicles
There is nothing more imposing on the highway than
a commercial vehicle transporting tonnes of cargo. Show
respect and use extra caution when driving near such
vehicles. Allow extra room when passing. Maintain an
appropriate speed when climbing a hill and even more
so when descending. A fully loaded commercial vehicle
descending a hill is like a heavy pendulum. It requires a
professional driver using his or her knowledge and skill
to keep the vehicle under control. It is very important to
keep your speed up. Remember, this vehicle uses the
downhill force to gain momentum to climb the next hill
67

===== PAGE 32 =====
Rules
of the
2Road(within the speed limit). Keep your distance and maintain an
appropriate speed. It is illegal for the driver of a commercial
motor vehicle to follow within 60 metres of another vehicle.
This rule applies when travelling on a highway outside a
business or residential district, but does not apply when
overtaking and passing another vehicle. Whether you are in
the passenger vehicle or in the commercial vehicle, all
drivers share the responsibility to drive defensively.
Drivers and school buses
During the hours that school buses are operating (generally
7–9 am and 2–4 pm), drivers should be especially careful.
Children waiting for the bus or getting off the bus might
dart into the street unexpectedly. Observe the flashing
lights on the school bus:
•Amber flashing lights alert you that the bus is about
to stop. Passing is allowed, but use extra caution and be
alert for the red flashing lights.
•Red flashing lights are used when the school bus is
stopped to pick up or discharge students. The bus must
also display a mechanical STOP sign with alternately
flashing red lights. All drivers must halt from behind or in
front of a school bus when red lights are flashing. You
must stop. Do not pass a school
bus with alternating flashing red
lights at any time or place or from
either direction, including
a divided boulevard.
School Bus with
flashing red lights
– correct stopping
distance
68

===== PAGE 33 =====
Rules
of the
It is illegal for you to exceed 50 km/h in a school zoneRoad2
when children are present, whatever the time or day.
Children may be playing on the school playground after
school hours or on the weekend. At school crossings,
both drivers and pedestrians must obey the instructions
of the crossing guard.
Watch for children around school buses and school bus
stops. Drive accordingly.
Drivers and motorcycles
The driver of a motorcycle is entitled to a full highway lane.
This is both a right and a safety precaution. Allow extra
space between your vehicle and the motorcycle so that you
both can react to quick stops and other potential hazards
with more manoeuvring room. Most fatal motorcycle crashes
involve collisions with automobiles. Usually, the vehicle
driver did not see the motorcyclist. More than half of these
collisions occur under good driving conditions.
Safety considerations:
•Be aware of all motorists around you and
their right to space.
•Be aware of your own limitations and drive within them.
•Motorcyclists should make themselves more visible by
wearing appropriate clothing with reflective material for
night driving, but they may not. So be careful. Always
drive defensively.
Drivers and bicycles
Riders of bicycles must obey the same traffic rules and
regulations that apply to all road users. Unfortunately,
not all bicycle riders know or understand this, especially
young children. So you have an extra responsibility to use
caution around bicyclists, especially children. You must also
respect the bicyclist’s right to share the road.
69

===== PAGE 34 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadSharing the Road with Bicycles
The Motorist:According to the Nova ScotiaMotor Vehicle
Act, bicyclists have the same rights and responsibilities as
motorists. Respect for the rights of all road users goes a long
way towards avoiding collisions.
The Cyclist:According to theNova Scotia Motor Vehicle Act
cyclists have the same rights and responsibilities as
motorists. When cyclists and motorists follow the same set
of rules, the chance of a collision is greatly reduced.
Preventing crashes
Watch For Bicyclists: Most collisions involving bicyclists
and motorists occur at intersections. This often happens
when a motorist pulls out from a stop sign or driveway
without yielding, or turns across a bicyclist’s path.
70

===== PAGE 35 =====
Rules
of the
Common car-bike collisionsRoad2
“Right Hook”: Many motorists misjudge the
speed of bicycles; they can travel faster than
you think! (Experienced cyclists can travel at
25-35 km/h on a flat surface and up to 50km/h
going downhill.) This misjudgment causes the
motorist to pass and turn directly in front of the
bicyclist. Scan the side of the road for bicyclists,
and if it is not safe to pass before turning, slow
down and move behind the cyclist before
making the turn. DO NOT pass and cut!
“Left Cross”: Motorists making turns which
cross oncoming traffic must watch for cyclists
as well as motor vehicles. Too often, motorists
misjudge the speed of an oncoming bicyclist
and turn in front of them. Motorists should
always stop and wait for oncoming traffic,
including bicycles, to pass before turning.
Getting Doored:When exiting your car, look
behind you for approaching bicyclists. Don’t
open your door unless it’s safe to do so.
Please keep in mind that bicycles are much
more vulnerable in a collision. Motorists must
realize that they are operating a large vehicle
and with that comes the responsibility to
ensure that it is safely operated.
71

===== PAGE 36 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadCycling strategies:
Be visible, be predictable
Where To Ride on the Road:Ride on the right side of the
road with the flow of traffic. Use as much of the lane as
required to be safe from roadside
hazards.
Signals:Use these hand signals
to indicate a turn or a stop.
An alternative right hand signal
is widely recognized.
Left turn signalRight turn signalAlternative rightSlowing/stopping
turn signalsignal
72

===== PAGE 37 =====
Rules
of the
Ride a StraightRoad2
Course: Don’t
weave between
parked cars.
Otherwise, a motorist
may lose sight of
you and there could
be a collision if you
suddenly pop out in
traffic again. Stay
at least one metre
from parked cars
to avoid opening
doors.
Look Behind You: Learn to quickly scan
the traffic behind you without swerving.
A rear view mirror helps to view traffic;
however a lane change requires a look
behind, which also signals your intention
to motorists.
Be Careful at Intersections:Intersections
can be dangerous for cyclists. At a four-way
stop, it is important for cyclists to remain in
line with the flow of traffic and to wait
their turn. Right-turn lanes are for traffic
that is making a turn;
don’t go into a turn
lane if you are going
to travel straight
ahead.
73

===== PAGE 38 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadVehicular Left Turn: Signal and look behind you. When
there’s an opening, move into the left lane and turn
from near the centre line.
Pedestrian Left Turn: The safest way to turn left on a
busy street includes a little walking too. Get off your
bicycle and walk it across the intersection using the
crosswalk. Wait for the light to change and walk your
bicycle across to the next corner, using the crosswalk.
Vehicular Left TurnPedestrian Left Turn
74

===== PAGE 39 =====
Rules
of the
Safety equipmentRoad2
Lights:When riding at night, you must use a white front
light and red rear reflector (a rear-facing flashing red light,
like an LED, is okay too). Reflectors and reflective tape on
your helmet,
clothes or
bicycle also
make you more
visible.
Horn: Attach a
horn or bell to
your handle
bars and use it
to warn
pedestrians and
other vehicles
that you are
near them.
Helmet Safety:By law, you must use a bicycle helmet when
operating a bicycle. A properly fitted helmet greatly reduces
the risk of brain injuries, the leading type of fatal or
disabling injury to bicyclists.
How to Properly Wear a Helmet:Read the manufacturer’s
instructions and consult with sales staff when you buy a
helmet; staff will make sure that you get a helmet that fits
you correctly. Generally speaking, wear the helmet low on
your forehead—about a two-finger width above your
eyebrows.
With the helmet on your head, try to move it gently from
side to side and back and forth. It should be snug enough to
move the skin. If not, use the thicker foam padding provided
with the helmet. Tighten the chinstraps with enough room to
slide one finger between the strap and the chin.
75

===== PAGE 40 =====
Rules
of the
2RoadSafe bicycling requires knowledge, skill, and maturity
on the part of the cyclist, and skill and attention on the
part of the motorist.
76