
===== PAGE 1 =====
Adverse
Driving
Conditions5
Adverse
Driving
Conditions
133

===== PAGE 2 =====
Adverse
Driving
5Conditions
This chapter contains information regarding driving
in poor conditions. It provides you with information
on the following:
• nighttime driving
• driving in the rain, snow, or fog
• road surfaces
• emergencies
134

===== PAGE 3 =====
Adverse
Driving
Coastal Nova Scotia is known for harsh and variableConditions5
weather. In this ocean-side province, the secret to arriving
safely is to adapt your driving to adverse driving conditions.
Some road and weather conditions warrant slow and
cautious driving. Slippery roads caused by rain, snow,
or sleet, and gravel or dirt roads, make it much more difficult
to control your vehicle. Fog, rain, snow, and floods reduce
visibility and can cause moisture to form on your brakes.
This will increase your stopping distance. These road and
weather conditions are especially dangerous because your
vehicle may not respond as expected, even though you may
respond quickly and diligently.
To prevent the weather conditions from controlling your
vehicle, you must
•anticipate potential problems. This may mean driving
cautiously or not driving at all when dangerous weather
conditions exist. Ask yourself: Have I listened to the
weather forecast? Should I be on the road?
•be ready to respond to weather conditions and their
effects on you and your vehicle. If you learn about
potential weather hazards and learn what to do when
you begin to lose control of your vehicle, you will be
better prepared to deal with adverse driving conditions.
The provinces and industry conduct ongoing research
to improve driving standards. Keep up to date by reading
articles and reports about driving techniques and vehicle
improvements such as ABS brakes.
135

===== PAGE 4 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsReduced Visibility
Nighttime driving
Nighttime driving is much more dangerous than
daytime driving because
•you cannot see as well in the dark
•there are more impaired drivers on the road at night
•you are more likely to be tired and therefore
less alert at night—driver inattention is a leading
cause of collisions
•headlights of oncoming
vehicles can blind you
Tips for nighttime driving:
•Use your headlights for all
nightime driving, starting half
an hour after sunset and
continuing until half an hour
before sunrise.
• Also use your headlights any
time that you can't see at least
300 metres ahead.
• When you drive at night in
a city, use lowbeam headlights.
On the open road, use
highbeam headlights unless
you are approaching or
following another vehicle.
•By law headlights must be
dimmed within 150 metres
of an approaching vehicle and
60 metres when following
a vehicle on any highway.
•Drive at a controlled
rate of speed.
High and Low
Beams Outside
136

===== PAGE 5 =====
Adverse
Driving
Remember:Conditions5
•Even if the oncoming driver does not dim his or her
lights, keep your lights on lowbeam.
•Stay on the right side of the road and use the edge
of the road as a guide
•Reduce your speed and watch the road as far ahead as
possible. Look slightly to the right so you will not be
looking directly into the headlights of oncoming traffic.
•Practice doing safety scans so that you can be aware
of everything around you.
Sunlight glare
Sunlight, either direct or reflected,
poses a dangerous driving situation.
To reduce this problem, adjust your
sun visor and wear sunglasses. If
these do not help, stop on the
roadside, well away from moving
traffic, until you can drive safely.
When you enter a tunnel or
underground parking garage on a
bright day, remember to slow down,
remove your sunglasses, and turn
on your headlights.
Rain, snow, and fog
Rain, snow, and fog reduce visibility
and limit your ability to see clearly. You should slow downHigh and Low
gradually, avoid sudden stops, increase your followingBeams Inside
distance, and stay alert. Use lowbeams only. The light from
your highbeams will reflect off the precipitation, making it
more difficult to see ahead. Do not use parking lights when
driving your vehicle on the highway, especially when adverse
conditions reduce visibility.
137

===== PAGE 6 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsIf you have extreme trouble seeing, you need to
•pull as far off the roadway as possible
•stop, secure the vehicle, and turn on its
emergency flashers
•leave the car from the passenger side and stay
away from the road
A trucker’s blind spots
Many motorists believe that truck drivers can see farther
ahead and can react more promptly to events as they
develop because they sit higher than most other drivers.
Being higher does have some advantages. However, truckers
have serious blind spots immediately in front of the cab,
on either side of the cab, and up to 200 feet in the rear.
A trucker cannot see over or through another truck in front
of him or her any better than you can and may have
a limited view of the road directly in front of the cab.
Some truckers can’t see the first 20 feet of road in front of
their bumper. This provides plenty of room for a car to slip
unnoticed into a position of danger. Even on more
streamlined tractors with sloped hoods or with no front
hood, there can be a blind spot of up to ten feet.
The blind spots on the sides and to the rear restrict
a trucker’s ability to take evasive action to avoid crashes.
To make yourself more visible, turn on your headlights,
use your signal lights for changing lanes, sound your horn
when overtaking and passing, and put more space between
yourself and the vehicle in front of you. Remember, if you
can’t see the truck driver in the truck’s side mirror,
the trucker can’t see you.
138

===== PAGE 7 =====
Adverse
Driving
Changes to the Road’s SurfaceConditions5
Rain
Rain both reduces visibility and makes roadway surfaces
dangerous. When it rains, you should drive more slowly than
usual and use your lowbeam headlights and windshield
wipers. Increase normal following distance to four or more
seconds. Stopping distances on slippery pavement are from
two to ten times farther than on dry pavement.
Roads are most dangerous for the first 10 to 15 minutes
after the rain has begun to fall, especially if it has not rained
for a while. This is because oil from the asphalt and residues
left on the road by vehicles mixes with dirt, dust, rubber, and
rain water to create a slick surface.
Wet pavement, when combined with other factors such
as vehicle speed and improper tire pressure, can cause you
to lose vehicle control due to hydroplaning. In a standard
passenger car, partial hydroplaning starts at about 55 km/h
and increases with speed. At about 85 km/h, the tires may
be riding totally on top of the water. When this happens,
there is no friction available to brake, accelerate, or corner.
A gust of wind or even a slight turn could create an
unpredictable and uncontrollable skid. When roads are wet,
reduce your speed to avoid hydroplaning.
Your brakes are also a concern in the rain. Wet brakes are
less effective. When driving in the rain, test your brakes
regularly. If the brakes don’t respond normally, apply some
pressure to the brake pedal with your left foot while you
apply light pressure to the gas pedal with your right.
Continue until the brakes work normally.
139

===== PAGE 8 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsSnow, frost, and ice
Snow and ice make roads very slippery, especially when the
temperature is at or below freezing. Slush makes it difficult
to steer, hard packed snow increases the danger of skidding,
and black ice makes driving extremely dangerous. Black ice
is a thin layer of ice that forms on the road’s surface.
Stopping distances for a vehicle travelling at 30 km/h are
approximately 6 metres on dry pavement, 22 metres on
packed snow, and 52 metres on black ice.
Remember that condensation on shaded sections of the
highway and on bridges and overpasses will freeze before
the rest of the road. Shaded sections, bridges, and
overpasses will also take longer than other parts of the
highway to thaw.
If you must drive during a snowstorm, reduce your speed,
use your windshield wipers and defroster, and turn on your
lowbeam headlights. Reduce your speed by more than half
for packed snow and slow to a crawl on ice. Using chains
or studded tires may improve your traction on snow and ice.
Gravel or dirt roads
You should use care when driving on any unpaved roads.
Even under ideal conditions and when driving slowly,
controlling your vehicle may be difficult. The loose dirt
or gravel on these surfaces increases stopping distances
significantly. Drive cautiously.
140

===== PAGE 9 =====
Adverse
Driving
About four-wheel driveConditions5
The amount of traction or friction between your tires and
the surface of the road determines the amount of control
you have over your vehicle. Each element listed on the
previous page reduces traction, making road surfaces
slippery. Even if you have four-wheel traction, you cannot
stop any quicker on a slippery road surface. Vehicles in four-
wheel drive handle differently than when they are in two-
wheel mode. Having four-wheel drive may create a false
sense of security. Drive cautiously.
Tips for dealing with slippery surfaces:
•Make only slight and gentle movements with your brake,
accelerator, and steering wheel. Sudden braking or
accelerating could cause a skid.
•Allow more time to complete your journey.
•Roads are the most slippery during the first 10 minutes
of a storm, so adjust your speed to the conditions and
drive with caution.
•Test the road surface to determine if slippery by applying
brakes slightly. If one of the tires locks, release brakes
immediately. This is called threshold braking.
•Early-morning frost can be a serious problem during the
fall and spring months. Check the forecast and listen
for updates. Road surfaces are far more slippery near
0°C than at colder temperatures of -10° or -20°C.
•Watch out for other drivers.
141

===== PAGE 10 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsStopping on ice
If you apply your brakes suddenly on an icy road, your car
will go into a skid. If you have to stop on a slippery surface,
it is advisable to keep the clutch engaged and apply slight
gradual pressure to the brakes, gradually slowing the vehicle
without locking the wheels. Using studded tires will
decrease your stopping distance on ice.
Rules for winter driving
Follow these simple rules for winter driving:
•Drive defensively and be prepared for any situation.
•Adjust your speed to the road and weather conditions.
•Allow yourself time and space to stop safely.
•Keep the windshield and windows clear.
•Be sure headlights, wiper blades, and defrosters are
in top working condition.
•Get the feel of the road by trying your brakes
occasionally whenever it is safe to do so.
•Use snow tires, tire chains, or studded tires
on snow and ice.
142

===== PAGE 11 =====
Adverse
Driving
EmergenciesConditions5
General highway trouble
Emergencies occur anytime, anywhere, and usually when
you least expect them. Knowing what to do in a given
situation can help you deal with the emergency and may
even reduce its effect.
You can avoid many potential vehicle emergencies by having
your vehicle serviced regularly. Check your vehicle owner’s
manual for the recommended maintenance schedule. Here
are some suggestions for dealing with potential problems:
•At the first sign of trouble, signal and take defensive
action. Check your mirrors, put on your four-way flashers,
slow down, and pull over as far off the road as possible.
Never stop in the driving lanes.
•If you have a cellular phone, call for help. If not, put
a “Call Police” sign in your side or back window, or tie
a white cloth around the antenna. Do not raise the hood.
Stay in your vehicle with the doors locked. If someone
stops, ask him or her to call the police or an
automobile club for you.
•Whenever you have a choice of braking or steering
to avoid a collision, generally it is best to use evasive
steering rather than braking. Alternatively, combine
threshold braking with steering. Steering is better than
braking at speeds over 40 km/h, because you need less
distance to steer around an object than to come to
a complete stop.
•You threshold brake by applying firm, steady pressure on
the brake pedal just short of the point where the wheels
lock up or stop turning. Ease off the brakes slightly if the
wheels do lock, then repeat. Many newer vehicles have
an antilock braking system (ABS). This system prevents
the brakes from locking, allowing you to press on the
brake pedal as hard as you can. Because the brakes will
not lock, you can still steer. Be sure to read the vehicle
owner’s manual on how to use your ABS.
143

===== PAGE 12 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsBrake failure
If your brakes fail, try pumping the brake pedal several times
to build up enough hydraulic pressure to allow you to stop.
If that doesn’t work, apply the parking brake gently but
firmly while holding the release button. Holding the release
button will allow you to manually increase or decrease
braking pressure. Once you manage to get stopped, do not
attempt to drive away. Get help.
Tire blowouts
A tire blowout can cause tremendous steering and wheel
vibration. You may notice this vibration either when the air
pressure in a tire is very low or after the tire blows. If this
happens, do not use the brake. Hold the steering wheel
firmly. Ease your foot off the accelerator slowly. Try to steer
the vehicle to a safe stop off the highway.
Power failure
Power failure will cause loss of power steering and power
brakes. This means it will be difficult, but not impossible,
to turn and to stop. It will take more effort to turn the
steering wheel and you must apply more pressure to the
brake pedal. Move off the highway and stop when you
safely can. Get help.
Headlight failure
If your headlights suddenly go out, check the light switch
a couple of times. Try switching between highbeams and
lowbeams. If that does not work, turn on the four-way
emergency flashers and any other light that may still work,
such as turn signals or fog lights. Get off the highway as
quickly and as safely as possible. Remember, it is both
dangerous and illegal to drive at night without lights.
144

===== PAGE 13 =====
Adverse
Driving
Sticking gas pedalConditions5
If your gas pedal sticks, try tapping the pedal or lifting it
by sliding your foot under it. Keep your eyes on the road.
Don’t bend down to lift the pedal with your hand. Turn on
your four-way emergency flashers, shift to neutral, apply
firm pressure to the brakes without locking them, and pull
off the road when it is safe to do so. Turn off the engine.
Call for help.
Vehicle fires
Rarely does a vehicle catch fire. If your car does catch fire, or
if you see or smell smoke, move the vehicle off the highway
and turn off the ignition immediately. Get passengers out of
and away from your vehicle. Move at least 30 metres away.
Fighting a fire safely and efficiently requires quick thinking
and fast action. Use extreme caution if you try to put
the fire out yourself.
•Shut off all remaining switches, such as ignition,
lights, and radio.
•Use a fire extinguisher, not water. Water spreads gasoline
and oil fires. You may also try smothering the flames with
earth, sand, or large articles of clothing. You should carry
a small fire extinguisher in your vehicle.
•When using a chemical extinguisher, keep some
chemical in reserve for flare-ups.
•Whenever possible, fight fires with the wind at your back.
• If you need to open the hood, do so slowly to avoid
a flare-up. Opening the hood may introduce fresh air
and oxygen to the fire. This will make it worse.
•Don’t risk your life. Gasoline fires can spread rapidly
and may explode.
145

===== PAGE 14 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsSkids
Stopping on ice requires skill, patience, and more distance
than usual. Your vehicle may go into a skid if you shift gears,
apply the brakes, or suddenly move the steering wheel.
Take your foot off the gas pedal and allow the vehicle
to slow down. Use evasive steering to avoid collisions.
When the vehicle has slowed enough, try threshold braking.
When rain, snow, ice, or loose gravel comes between your
tires and the highway, there is the possibility of a skid.
Remember, too, that rain or snow on bridges and overpasses
freezes before the rest of the roadway.
Wheels leaving the pavement
When your tires drop off the pavement onto the shoulder
of the road, be careful. Returning to the highway from the
shoulder can be extremely dangerous. Resist the urge to
whip the vehicle immediately back onto the pavement.
You may lose of control of the vehicle. When it is safe and
your steering is under control move the steering wheel
smoothly back onto the pavement, keeping your eyes
forward looking at the centre of your lane. This allows the
leading edge of the front tire to climb up over the edge
of the pavement smoothly.
Animals on the road
Always be alert for animals on the road. Animal crossing
signs warn you where there is a known danger of large
animals such as moose, deer, or cattle stepping out onto
the road. Animals, however, may appear from anywhere.
Look well ahead. At night, use your highbeams when
possible.
146

===== PAGE 15 =====
Adverse
Driving
Vehicle plunging into waterConditions5
Your vehicle will float for three to ten minutes if the
windows are closed. Your seatbelt can prevent you from
being knocked unconscious during the vital moments
required to escape. Doors will be difficult to open at first due
to water pressure as the vehicle begins to sink or because of
vehicle damage. As the vehicle fills with water, pressure
inside and outside equalizes.
The best escape route is through the windows. If you have
power windows, roll them down immediately, because water
will cause a short circuit in the electrical system. If you can’t
open the windows, try not to panic.
Most vehicles will sink nose first, so the air trapped inside
will be pushed to the rear near the roof. You may need to
breathe this air while waiting for the pressure inside and
outside to become equal. Then it will be easier to open
a door and get out.
Electrical wires on the roadway
Stay in the vehicle if at all possible. Do not touch the ground
or anything outside the vehicle. Staying in the vehicle is
always the first choice, but if you must exit because of other
circumstances, such as fire, you need to jump clear with both
feet together, not touching any other part of the vehicle.
Then shuffle with both feet together, away from the scene,
until you are at least 20 metres, or 65 feet, away. Onlookers,
too, should know the importance of staying clear of any
accident involving live wires.
147

===== PAGE 16 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsEncountering snow plows
During winter storms, watch for snow plows clearing the
roads. The flashing lights warn you of wide, slow-moving
vehicles. Some snow plows have a wing that extends up to
three metres to the right of the vehicle. On highways, several
snow plows may be staggered across the road, clearing all
lanes at the same time by passing a ridge of snow from
plow to plow. Do not try to pass between them. This is
extremely dangerous. There is not enough room to pass
safely, and the ridge of wet snow can throw your vehicle
out of control.
148

===== PAGE 17 =====
Adverse
Driving
CollisionsConditions5
Procedures and responsibilities
The driver of a vehicle involved in a collision must stop
immediately. It is an offence to leave the scene of a collision.
You must file a report within 24 hours with the local police,
the RCMP, or the Registry of Motor Vehicles if the collision
involves personal injury, death, or property damage of
$2000 or more.$1000 or more.
If you are involved in a collision, you must provide your
name, address, and vehicle permit for the vehicle you are
driving to the person struck, to the driver or occupant of the
other vehicle, or to a witness. You must also give all
reasonable assistance to any injured person.
If you are physically incapable of making a report and
another occupant is in the vehicle, then the occupant must
make the report.
If you are in charge of a garage or repair shop and you
receive a vehicle for servicing that shows evidence of having
been involved in a serious collision, then you must notify the
police within 24 hours. Your report must include the vehicle
make, the serial and registration numbers, the name and
address of the operator or owner, and the name of the
person who brought it to or left it in your repair shop.
149

===== PAGE 18 =====
Adverse
Driving
5ConditionsIf you are involved in a collision that damages an
unattended vehicle or property, you and every driver
involved must take reasonable steps to locate and notify
the owner. If you are unable to locate and notify the owner,
then you must notify the police within 24 hours.
Suspension of a licence after a collision
If the Registry of Motor Vehicles receives a report of
a collision causing property damage in an apparent amount
of $50 or more or in bodily injury or death, and there
is no proof of financial responsibility, your licence and
all registrations in your name will be suspended.
150