
===== PAGE 1 =====
Your
Driver’s
Licence1
Your Driver’s
Licence
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
Your
Driver’s
1Licence
This chapter contains information on obtaining and
holding a Nova Scotia driver’s licence. The Registry of
Motor Vehicles, under the authority of the Motor Vehicle
Act, issues, renews, and suspends driver’s licences.
Possession of a driver’s licence and the privilege of
driving are major responsibilities.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Your
Driver’s
The Nova Scotia Licensing SystemLicence1
To drive in Nova Scotia, you must have a valid driver’s
licence, and it must be the right type of licence for the
kind of vehicle you want to drive (car, truck, motorcycle,
etc.). Nova Scotia has different classes of licences to match
different types of vehicles. Since most people drive only
passenger vehicles, most of the information in this first
section deals with that type of licence, which is called
a Class 5 licence.
Nova Scotia also has what is called a Graduated Driver
Licensing program (or “GDL” for short), which has 3 levels:
1learner’s licence (sometimes called the
“beginner’s licence”)
2newly licensed driver’s licence
3driver’s licence
All new drivers have to graduate from the first level,
and then from the second level, before they can get a
regular driver’s licence. This way, new drivers gradually
gain experience over a period of several years. They move
through a series of tests and restrictions on their driving
privileges, which are gradually removed as they progress.
Finally, when they are experienced enough, they become
a fully licensed driver.
This program applies to all new drivers of passenger
vehicles in Nova Scotia, whatever your age. A similar
program is in place for all new motorcycle operators,
including experienced licensed drivers of other
classifications.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceVisitors
If you are a visitor to Nova Scotia or a new resident you
can drive in this province for up to 90 days without getting
a Nova Scotia driver’s licence, on two conditions: (1) you
must have a valid driver’s licence from another jurisdiction
(province, state, country, etc.), and (2) you must be at least
16 years old. After 90 days, you have to get a Nova Scotia
driver’s licence.
Note:there is also the question of your vehicle permit
and licence plates. If you are a visitor, you can drive a vehicle
with out-of-province plates for 90 days; after that, it has to
have Nova Scotia plates. If you have actually moved to
Nova Scotia, you can drive with out-of-province plates for
only 30 days.
Getting a Nova Scotia
Driver’s Licence
People who apply for a Nova Scotia driver’s licence fall
into one of three groups:
1brand new drivers
2drivers who used to have a Nova Scotia driver’s licence,
but don’t now
3visitors and new residents who have an out-of-province
driver’s licence
Brand new drivers
(someone who has never had any kind
of driver’s licence before)
In Nova Scotia, all new drivers regardless of their age have
to work through the Graduated Driver Licensing program,
and start by getting their learner’s licence. How to do that
is explained later on in this section.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Your
Driver’s
People who used to have a valid NovaLicence1
Scotia driver’s licence, but don’t now
If you are holding an expired Nova Scotia driver’s licence
that expired less than three years ago, you can
get a new one without taking either a written test
or a road test.
If your Nova Scotia driver’s licence expired more than
three years ago, the situation is different. Everything
depends upon whether or not you ever had a valid licence
for at least two full years. If you didn’t, then you are
considered a “brand new driver,” and just like any other new
driver, you will have to go through the full Graduated Driver
Licensing program. If you had a valid licence for two full
years or more, you will still have to take the written and
road tests.
Road test:You have to make an appointment in advance
to take a road test and you have to pay for it before you
can get an appointment. For more information on the road
test and how to apply for it, go to page 13 in this book,
or use the Internet and visit the section on the road test,
newly licensed driver’s licence, in the Nova Scotia Permits
Directory. The Directory address is <www.gov.ns.ca/snsmr/
paal/>.
New Residents
Canada:People from another province or territory of
Canada can usually exchange their existing licence for a
Nova Scotia driver’s licence. You can do this without taking
any written tests or a road test, if you meet all of these
conditions:
•You are at least 16 years old.
•Your existing licence is valid, that is, not suspended
or revoked.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Your
Driver’s
1Licence•Your licence is for passenger vehicles only. (If your licence
is for larger vehicles, then you will also need to supply
a satisfactory medical report. Contact Service Nova Scotia
for details.)
•If your licence has expired, it expired less than three
years ago.
•If your licence includes a school bus endorsement,
then you will have to pass a road test.
United States of America:If you are from an American
state, the rules are the same as for Canada (above), with
one difference:
•If your licence has any conditions attached that might
interfere with the safe operation of a vehicle, then you
must pass a road test.
Other Countries:If your driver’s licence is not from Canada
or the USA, you cannot usually exchange your licence for
a Nova Scotia driver’s licence. Instead, you will have to take
a vision test, a written test on safety rules, a written test on
Nova Scotia traffic signs, and a road test.
Getting a Learner’s Licence
(called Class 7)
The first stage in the Nova Scotia Graduated Driver Licensing
program is called the learner’s licence. This licence is valid for
one year.
Who can apply?
Any resident of Nova Scotia who is at least 16 years old.
If you are 16 or 17 years old ...
If you are under 18, you must have written permission to get
a learner’s licence. This is done through a signed consent
form, which you can get from any office of the Registry of
Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia centre.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Your
Driver’s
•If you have a parent or a guardian who has custody overLicence1
you, one of them has to sign.
•If both of your parents are deceased, and you do not
have a legal guardian, your employer can sign.
•If you are married and your spouse is over 18,
your spouse can sign.
Questions for young adults to consider if they are thinking
of applying for a learner’s licence:
•When I get angry, am I really good at keeping
it under control?
•Am I consistently willing to follow basic rules laid out
by authority figures?
•Can I keep my mind focused on what I am doing, or do
I tend to get easily distracted?
•Am I prepared to acquire the knowledge, skills, and
attitudes that will make me a safe driver?
How to Apply for a Learner’s
Licence
1Study this driver’s handbook. When you come into our
office to apply for your learner’s licence, you will be given
two written tests (oral tests are given in some cases),
a road sign test and a rules test. Each test consists of
20 multiple-choice questions. To pass, you must answer
16 questions correctly. All the information you will need
to pass these tests is in this handbook.
2Arrange to be tested. Pay the knowledge test fee and
obtain a receipt. Testing schedules are different for the
various offices across the province. Phone ahead to find
out when to come to the nearest testing site. Phone
424-5851 within the Halifax Regional Municipality or toll-
free anywhere in Nova Scotia 1-800-898-7668. Generally,
written learner testing is done on a first-come, first-
served basis. We will make every effort to serve you as
quickly and as efficiently as possible.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Your
Driver’s
1Licence3Come into our office. Bring the following documents
with you:
•proof of your age
We will accept your birth certificate, Nova Scotia
I.D. card, passport, Canadian Citizenship card,
Immigration papers (either Record of Landing or
Permanent Resident card), Military identification
documents, or Certificate of Indian Status card.
•two other pieces of identification that contain your
name and signature
We accept official documents such as credit cards,
bank cards, or health cards.
•if your name has changed due to marriage or a formal
name change and the name on your Birth Certificate
is different than the two pieces of signed ID, you must
bring in supporting documentation such as your
Marriage Certificate or Change of Name Certificate
from Vital Statistics.
•if you are 16 or 17 years old, a signed consent form
You may bring a signed consent form with you or
bring your parent, or other acceptable signee, with
you to sign the consent at the time of testing.
4Complete an application form. This is called an
Application for Driver’s Licence.
5Pass a vision test. This is a screening test to ensure that
you meet minimum vision standards. It includes a colour
test, a field-of-vision test (minimum 120 degrees),
a visual acuity test (minimum 6/12 [20/40] Snellen), and
a distance-judgement test. If your vision is not acceptable
for driving, then a licence will not be issued. You will be
given a form to be completed by an ophthalmologist or
optometrist. Once the form is completed, present it to a
driver enhancement officer. The specialist’s professional
opinion and recommendations will be accepted. If you do
require visual correction, a licence will not be issued until
it has been obtained. If you can only pass the vision test
using corrective lenses, your licence will be issued with
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Your
Driver’s
the following condition: Valid only while licence holderLicence1
is wearing proper visual correction.
6Pass a road sign test. This tests your ability to recognize
and understand the meaning of highway road signs. You
must answer 16 of 20 questions correctly.
7Pass a rules test. This tests your knowledge of traffic laws
and rules for safe driving. You must answer 16 of 20
multiple-choice questions correctly.
8Pay the licence fee. Once you have passed all three tests
(vision test, road test, rules test), go to the transaction
counter and pay the licence
fee. You will then be given
your learner’s licence. As
a convenience, you may pay for
the road test at the same time.
Note: keep your road test receipt.
If you lose the receipt or forget to
bring it to the road test you will
have to purchase another one.
9Congratulations! You now have
your learner’s licence and have
become part of the Graduated Driver
Licensing program. Learn the
conditions under which you may drive
and then practise, practise, practise.Sample of
Remember to always carry your learner’s licence with youLearner’s Licence
when you are operating a motor vehicle.
Expiry
Your learner’s licence is good for one year. If you have not
acquired your newly licensed driver’s licence (called Class
5N) before the end of the twelfth month, you must then
reapply for a learner’s licence. However, you will not have
to wait an additional three or six months before taking
a road test.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceRestrictions
While you hold a learner’s licence, you must comply with
two important restrictions on your driving:
1You must drive with an experienced driver in the
front seat of the vehicle and no other passengers.
An experienced driver is someone who has held
a valid driver’s licence for two years and is no longer
in the GDL program.
2Your blood-alcohol level must
remain at zero. That means
absolutely no drinking when
driving.
If you violate these restrictions,
you will receive demerit points.
As a learner, if you get four or more
demerit points, then your driving
privileges will be suspended for six
months. The suspension will delay
your taking the road test and
moving to the newly licensed driver
stage. (See pages 28 and 29 for
information on demerit points.)
Don’t Drink and
Drive symbol
Becoming a Good Driver
It takes both a safe driving attitude and experience to be
a good driver. A safe driving attitude comes from thinking
about safety, being cautious, and avoiding unnecessary risks.
Through experience, your skills and coordination will improve.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Your
Driver’s
As a good driver, you willLicence1
•always wear a seat belt and ensure that your
passengers do so
•never drive when you are impaired by alcohol, prescribed
medications, or illegal drugs
•think twice about driving when you are tired or
too emotional
•keep your vehicle and yourself in good condition
(See Section 4 on safety.)
If you are going to become a driver, become a good driver.
Be preparedProvincial statistics
•Identify situations that require concentration or reaction.indicate that the
•Predict what other drivers and pedestrians will do orGraduated Driver
might do.
Licensing program
•Make safe decisions.has contributed to
the downward
Identifying dangerous situations early improves the chancestrend of highway
of making a safe decision. Avoid distractions. Perform safety
collisions for new
scans continuously. A European study revealed that if driversdrivers in the
had just one more second to react, 80 per cent of crashesprovince of
could be avoided.Nova Scotia.
(Based on
Learn to control your vehicleevaluation by the
Professional racing drivers control their vehicles with greatTraffic Injury
precision. For them, even a slight mistake could result inResearch
an collision causing injury or even death. You too must learn
Foundation, 2003.)
to control your vehicle with precision. It is very important
to begin with good instruction. Often in life learning comes
from making mistakes. However, there is no room for error
when operating a vehicle.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceDriver training programs
At some point along the way, before you can exit the GDL
program and get your regular driver’s licence, you will have
to take a driver training program that is approved by Service
Nova Scotia. You can take either the long course or the short
course. The long course involves at least 25 hours of
classroom time and at least 10 hours of actual driving time.
The short course is 6 hours of classroom time.
Learners, take note: if you take the long course, you can
take your road test after only three months (instead of six).
There are also some other advantages:
•You may save money on insurance.
•You learn to drive from a professional instructor.
•You will automatically meet a requirement you need
to exit the GDL program and get your regular
driver’s licence.
Tips for safe, fuel-efficient driving
•Don’t drive aggressively— quick starts, hard stops,
and extreme aggressive driving can increase fuel
consumption by up to 39 per cent.
•Drive at the posted speed limit— increasing your
cruising speed from 100 km/h to 120 km/h will increase
fuel consumption by 20 per cent.
•Don’t idle— when you let your vehicle idle longer than
10 seconds, you burn more fuel then you would
restarting the engine.
•Drive only when you need to— leave your vehicle at
home whenever possible by walking, biking, blading,
carpooling, or taking the bus to nearby locations.
•Plan ahead— If you have to drive, plan the most fuel-
efficient route in advance.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Your
Driver’s
•Use your vehicle’s air conditioner sparingly— usingLicence1
your air conditioner in stop-and-go traffic can increase
fuel consumption by as much as 20 per cent. Try opening
the windows or fresh air vents to cool your vehicle.
•Measure the inflation level of your tires once a
month.A single tire under-inflated by just 56kPa (8psi)
can increase your vehicle’s fuel consumption by 4 per
cent.
•Use cruise control— on dry, flat wide-open highways,
use cruise control to help improve fuel efficiency by
maintaining an even speed.
•Maintain your vehicle properly— a poorly
maintained vehicle consumes more fuel, produces higher
levels of emissions, requires more expensive repairs, and
has a lower resale value.
Find out more information at <vehicles.gc.ca>.
Road Test
Normally, learners have to wait at least six months before
they can take a road test. (However, if you pass a long-
course driver training program, you have to wait only
three months.)
Steps
1Pay the road test fee and obtain a receipt.
2Make an appointment for the road test by calling our
Telephone Information Centre at 424-5851 or toll free
outside Metro 1-800-898-7668. You need your road
test receipt number when making the appointment.
Note: Your road test will be cancelled if road or weather
conditions are hazardous at the appointed time.
3Bring the following items to your appointment:
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
Your
Driver’s
1Licence•road test receipt—if you lose the receipt or forget
to bring it to your road test, you will have to purchase
another one
•a vehicle to take the test with. It should be one that
you have driven before and that is comfortable and
familiar to you. Your vehicle must be in good
mechanical condition and must have a valid safety
inspection sticker
•your current licence
•the motor vehicle permit for the vehicle you will
be driving
•a valid insurance liability card in the name
of the registered owner of the vehicle that you
will be driving
4Read the instruction sheet provided by the driver
enhancement officer before the actual road test.
5The driver enhancement officer will begin by asking
for your learner’s licence, vehicle permit, and insurance
liability card. The driver enhancement officer will then ask
you to demonstrate the use of signal lights, horn, brake
light, headlights, windshield wipers, and hand signals.
6Listen as the driver enhancement officer explains the test.
Follow his or her instructions. During the driving test,
do not talk unnecessarily to the driver enhancement
officer, who will be busy giving instructions, observing
your performance, and recording your score.
7Take the test. During the test, the driver enhancement
officer will be observing the following:
•how well you control the vehicle during starting,
stopping, turning, and parking
•your observation skills, including shoulder checks,
when and how often you use your mirrors, and
where you look
•how well you respond to traffic, pavement markings,
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Your
Driver’s
signs, and possible hazardsLicence1
•how well you manage the space around your vehicle
•your ability to make safe lane changes
•how closely you follow and stop behind
other vehicles
•how you communicate with other road users,
including your use of turn signals and brake lights
and whether you make eye
contact with other drivers and
pedestrians
•your ability to make good
driving decisions, such as
knowing when to yield the
right of way
•your speed
8At the end of the test, the driver
enhancement officer will give
you a complete report of your
skills and explain any mistakes
you may have made. The driver
enhancement officer will tell you
if you have passed.
If you do not pass the road test,
the driver enhancement officer
will advise you on how to
improve your driving skills. You
should study some more and get
more practice. You must wait at
least one week before you may
take the test again. You must pay
another road test fee and book another
appointment.Sample of Road
Test Score Sheet
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Your
Driver’s
1Licence9If you have passed the road test, the driver enhancement
officer will tell you how to exchange your learner’s
licence for a newly licenced one. Note that there is a time
limit to do this.
You must have your driver’s licence upgraded within 6
months of passing the road test. Failure to do so will
result in you having to complete the road test again.
You will find a sample road test score sheet in the back of
this handbook, under Driver’s Licence Examination.
Newly Licensed Drivers
(called “Class 5N”)
Once you pass the road test, you leave the learner’s stage
and advance to the newly licensed stage. You remain in this
stage for at least two full years.
Restrictions
While you have a newly licensed driver’s licence, you must
comply with three important restrictions on your driving:
1Your blood alcohol level must remain at zero.
2Passengers: You may transport only one passenger in the
front seat and only as many rear seat passengers as
there are seat belts.
3Curfew: You cannot drive between midnight and
5:00 am unless you meet one of the following conditions:
•You are accompanied by an experienced driver who
has held a Class 5 licence for at least two years and is
not still in the GDL system. The experienced driver
must be in the front seat.
•You are exempted by Service Nova Scotia/Registry of
Motor Vehicles.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
Your
Driver’s
Exemption from nighttimeLicence1
driving curfew
If you are required to drive to and from work between
midnight and 5:00 am, you must apply for an exemption
from the nighttime driving restriction. There is a fee for this
exemption. An application form can be obtained from the
Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia centre.
No upgrade while in GDL
You cannot apply to upgrade to a higher class of licence
(1-4) while in the newly licensed stage.
Demerit points and suspension
The demerit-point system remains in effect during this stage.
If you accumulate six points, then your driving privileges will
be suspended for six months. If you are suspended while at
the newly licensed stage, then you will not be able to move
to experienced driver status for two years from the date your
licence is reinstated, nor can your licence be upgraded to
a higher class of licence. For more
information on demerit points and
the point table refer to pages 28 and
29.
Exiting the GDL
program
To complete the graduated driver
licensing program and receive your
Class 5 experienced driver’s licence,
you must do all of the following:
•have your newly licensed driver’s
licence for at least two years
•successfully complete an authorized
driver training program
Note:any recognized programSample of
completed after October 1, 1994, will be accepted.
Class 5 Licence
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
Your
Driver’s
1Licence•provide a copy of your graduation certificate, in person or
by mail*, to any Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access
Nova Scotia centre for record purposes
•exchange your Class 5N licence for your regular-class
licence (Class 5) (No fee is charged for this exchange.)
*If you mail in your Class 5N licence you cannot drive
until you receive your Class 5 licence back.
Congratulations! Now all driving restrictions placed on you
while driving under the GDL program are lifted.
If you do not follow the above procedure, you will remain
Public awarenessin the GDL program indefinitely. This means that you will
during the initialcontinue to be subject to the program restrictions.
implementation
of the GDL
program resultedAnswers to Some Commonly
in a substantialAsked Questions about the
reduction in driverGDL Program
injuries and
fatalities for youngAs a learner, do I have to go to a driving school
drivers aged 16 toto get my Class 5N licence?
No.
21 years. (Based
on the Health
Information andWho must participate in the GDL program?
Education section,Any person, regardless of age, who applies for a learner’s
licence to learn to drive. This includes anyone, including
Nova Scotia
Department ofexperienced drivers (two years), who applies for a
Health, 1995.)motorcycle licence.
How long is a learner’s licence valid?
A maximum of one year. You must either pass the road test
by that time or rewrite the learner’s test. If you must rewrite
the learner’s test, you are not required to wait an additional
three or six months before taking a road test.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Your
Driver’s
What are the stages of the GDL program forLicence1
passenger vehicle drivers?
Each new driver begins as a learner (Class 7) and progresses
to the next stage, newly licensed driver (Class 5N), before
exiting as an experienced driver (Class 5).
ClassTo enter stageLength of time
in stage
Learner (Class 7)Pass a writtenAt least three
and a vision test.months, or six
months if no
recognized driver
course is taken.
Must rewrite after
twelve months
has expired.
Newly LicensedPass a road test.At least two
(Class 5N)years. No
maximum time.
ExperiencedComplete all GDL exit requirements:
(Class 5)spend 24 consecutive months in the
program with no suspensions; complete
a driver training program and register
the certificate with the Registry of
Motor Vehicles; and turn in your
Class 5N licence.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceI have a learner’s licence. Who is allowed to teach
me to drive and are there any restrictions?
An experienced licensed driver who has had at least two
years of driving experience and is not currently in the GDL
program can teach you to drive. The licensed driver must be
seated in the front passenger seat and no other passengers
can be in the vehicle.
There are exemptions from these restrictions:
1More than one Driver Enhancement Officer may be in
a vehicle that is being driven by a person holding
a learner’s licence.
2When a licensed learner is driving a motor vehicle that
is equipped with dual control brake and is accompanied
by an instructor approved by Service Nova Scotia, there
may be up to three students in the back seat.
It is illegal for a licensed learner to drive a motorcycle
or a farm tractor on a public road except when being
examined by an examiner.
When can I take a road test to become a newly
licensed driver and get a Class 5N licence?
After a six-month waiting period. You may shorten this
period to three months by completing an approved driver-
training program that has a minimum of 25 hours of
classroom theory and 10 hours of driving time.
As a newly licensed driver under GDL, how many
passengers may I have in my vehicle?
Only one passenger in the front seat and no more
passengers in the rear seat than the number of seat belts.
For trucks, only one passenger is allowed in the front seat.
As a newly licensed driver participating in GDL,
can I drive on 100-series highways?
Yes. There is no restriction on which highways you may use.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Your
Driver’s
How long must I remain in the newly licensedLicence1
or Class 5N stage?
At least two years.
What must I do to exit the newly licensed stage
after the two-year period?
You must do two things: provide proof (in person or by mail)
to the Registry of Motor Vehicles or Access Nova Scotia
Centre that you completed a recognized driver training
program and exchange your Class 5N licence for a regular
Class 5 licence. You may mail in your Class 5N licence with
a letter of explanation. However, if you mail in your Class 5N
licence, you must not drive until you receive your Class 5
licence back. If you drive without your licence in your
possession, you will be violating the Motor Vehicle Act.
Is there a charge for this service?
No fee is charged when you exchange your Class 5N for
a Class 5 licence, provided your driver’s licence is valid at
the time of exchange. If your licence has expired you must
pay the renewal fee.
What happens if I choose not to advance through
the program?
You would remain a Class 5N driver and all the restrictions
related to that class would apply indefinitely.
What are the main operating conditions placed
on newly licensed drivers in the GDL program?
•Maintain a zero blood alcohol level.
•Drive only between 5 am and midnight.
•Have no more than one passenger in the front seat
•Carry only the number of passengers in the rear seat
for which seat belts are available.
•No upgrade to a higher class of licence.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceAre there penalties for violating the GDL program
under the Motor Vehicle Act?
Yes. Fines will be levied and demerit points added to your
driving record.
If you are convicted of a speeding violation, you could,
in addition to any other penalty imposed, lose your driving
privileges for one week and accumulate four demerit points
on your driving record. You will remain in the GDL program.
However, you will receive a letter requiring you to book an
interview with a driver enhancement officer. You must attend
this interview. If you fail to book an appointment or to
attend the interview, your driving privileges could be
suspended indefinitely.
If you are convicted of having care and control of a motor
vehicle and have a blood alcohol content exceeding
0 milligrams (.00), you will accumulate six demerit points
and will lose your driving privileges for six months.
Any time you accumulate six demerit points on your driving
record, you will lose your driving privileges for six months.
If you lose your driving privileges, you must complete
a minimum two-year period as a newly licensed driver from
the date your licence is restored or reinstated. This means
that if you have held your Class 5N licence for one year and
11 months and your driving privileges are suspended, then
you must start the two-year period for newly licensed
drivers all over.
Are there any conditions under which I can
operate a vehicle during the midnight-to-5 am
driving curfew?
Yes. You may drive during curfew hours if you are
accompanied by an experienced driver sitting in the front
seat of the vehicle or if you have obtained an exemption
from the Registry of Motor Vehicles.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Your
Driver’s
Do people who hold Class 8 farm tractor licencesLicence1
before October 1994 fall under the GDL program?
Yes. Once a Class 8 licence holder turns 16, that licence is
also valid as a learner’s licence (Class 7). The holder then
falls under the restrictions of the GDL program.
What happens if I lose my driver-training program
certificate?
You must contact the driving school or agency for a
replacement certificate. You may have to pay to have
it replaced.
Renewing Your Licence
You must renew your driver’s licence every five years.
You are responsible for making sure that this is done.
Service Nova Scotia will send you a renewal notice
approximately two months before your birthday to the
address recorded at the Registry of Motor Vehicles. Be sure
to keep your address up to date. Bring the renewal notice to
any Access Nova Scotia centre or Registry of Motor Vehicles
office to have your licence renewed. If you do not receive a
renewal notice you must complete an application to renew
your driver’s licence at any Access Nova Scotia centre or
Registry of Motor Vehicle office. Holders of classes 1, 2, 3,
and 4 licences must have a completed satisfactory medical
upon renewal.
When renewing your driver’s licence you must notify the
customer service representative of the following:
•any changes in your physical or mental health that might
limit or alter your ability to operate a vehicle. Examples of
these changes include heart conditions, mental
conditions, eye diseases, diabetes, strokes, substance
abuse, conditions resulting in the loss of consciousness,
and reduction in the use of a limb.
•any revocation or suspension of your licence
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceIf you do not provide this information, then your driving
privileges may not be renewed. Read the renewal
application carefully before signing it.
If you have not paid all or part of a fine you have incurred
plus the costs, the Registrar will refuse to provide further
services until the fine and costs have been paid in full. You
must pay a $30 fee to the Registry of Motor Vehicles to
reinstate services.
Losing Your Licence
The possession of a driver’s licence is a privilege that may be
withdrawn for just cause at any time.
Mandatory revocation
Your licence or privilege of obtaining a licence will be
revoked automatically if you are convicted of any of the
following offences:
•failing to stop at the scene of a collision under the
Criminal Code of Canada
•causing death or bodily harm due to negligence in the
operation of a motor vehicle
•manslaughter resulting from the operation of
a motor vehicle
•criminal negligence where you have not caused
death or injury
•theft of a motor vehicle or taking a motor vehicle without
the consent of the owner
•driving while impaired by alcohol or any drug
•failing or refusing to provide a breath sample
•driving with more than 80 mg of alcohol in
100 ml of blood
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
Your
Driver’s
•dangerous driving under the Criminal Code of CanadaLicence1
•flight from a peace officer under the Criminal Code of
Canada
•driving while disqualified due to revocation or suspension
of your licence
•making a false affidavit or declaration
•refusing to provide a blood sample
•impaired driving causing death or injury
If you are convicted of any of these offenses, the revocation
of your driver’s licence will take place, whether or not you
receive a notice from the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
If your driver’s licence has been revoked as a result
of a conviction, it will remain revoked until you file an
application to have it restored. You may apply to have your
licence restored 30 days before your eligibility date (except
where the revocation was for an alcohol-related offence).
The application must be accompanied by the applicable fees
(if your licence or driving privilege was revoked for an
alcohol-related offence, the applicable fees may be higher).
If your driver’s licence has been suspended or revoked for
an alcohol-related driving offence, you must attend an
Alcohol Assessment Program before you can get your driving
privileges back. The Alcohol Assessment Program is
sponsored by Addiction Services of the District Health
Authority.
If you are convicted under the Criminal Code of Canada,
the court will impose a prohibition order against driving
a motor vehicle anywhere in Canada. This may be for a
different period than the revocation period imposed under
the Nova Scotia Motor Vehicle Act.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceSuspension without conviction
Your licence or privilege of obtaining a licence may be
suspended without conviction if the Registrar has reason
to believe that you
•have committed an offence that would result in
mandatory revocation
•have caused or contributed to a collision that resulted
in death, injury, or serious property damage by reckless
or unlawful driving
•are incompetent to drive or have mental or physical
disabilities that could cause you to drive unsafely
•are an habitual reckless or negligent driver
•have committed a serious violation of the Motor Vehicle
Act or of the provisions of the Criminal Code of Canada
relating to motor vehicles
•have operated a vehicle while the vehicle was being used
for unlawful purposes
•are an habitual violator of the provisions of the
Motor Vehicle Act
Your licence may also be suspended if you
•lend your licence
•use another person’s licence
•fail to obey restrictions imposed on your licence
•take a driver’s test to obtain a licence for another person
The Registrar may suspend or revoke your driver’s licence if
•a court, judge, or justice recommends it
•you fail or refuse to submit to an examination when
required to do so
•you fail to provide information as requested
•you fail to take a driver training program when required
•you fail to successfully complete a driver training
program when required
•you fail to submit a medical report from a qualified
medical practitioner
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
Your
Driver’s
The Registrar may also suspend or cancel the registrationLicence1
of a vehicle and may suspend or revoke any permit
•when the Department determines that the vehicle is
unsafe or unfit to be operated or is not equipped as
required by law
•when the vehicle is used for any unlawful purpose
•when the owner allows the vehicle to be used by another
person who is not entitled to drive it
•when the driver’s licence of the owner has been
suspended or revoked
Court-imposed suspension
Your licence may be suspended by the court or magistrate
if you are convicted of a violation under the Motor Vehicle
Act. The suspension will be in addition to any fine that may
be imposed. The period of suspension will vary according to
the type of violation, and it depends on whether this is a
first, second, third, or subsequent offence. Check the
Motor Vehicle Act or the Criminal Code of Canada for
suspension periods.
By accumulating too many
demerit points
Demerit points are assigned to your driver’s record if you
are convicted of certain offences under the Motor Vehicle
Act. These points remain on your driver’s record for two
years from the date of conviction. Points will be assigned to
your record even if you did not have a licence at the time of
the offense, or if you had an out-of-province licence. A record
will be created and notice of the conviction will be sent to
the proper province. If you are convicted in another province
and that province sends the Registrar the conviction, it will
be entered on your Nova Scotia driving record and the
demerit points will be assigned as if the same offence
occurred in Nova Scotia.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceDemerit Points
The following table shows the number of demerit points
assigned for convictions under various sections of the Motor
Vehicle Act.
ConvictionSection(s)Violated
Number
of Points
Careless and imprudent1006
driving
Speeding or dangerous1016
driving
Failing to stop at an976
accident or to perform any
duty imposed by Section 97
Racing1636
Blood Alcohol Content100A(1)6
(BAC) exceeds .00 (Zero)
Failing to comply with100A(4)6
demand
Passing school bus103(3)6
Failing to obey a125A6
crossing guard
Improper passing114, 115(1)(a)4
Speeding in excess of1024
speed limit
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Your
Driver’s
ConvictionSection(s)ViolatedLicence1
Number
of Points
Speeding in excess of103(1)4
posted limit – school area
Speeding in excess of106A(a)2
posted limit between
1 & 15 km/hr inclusive
Speeding in excess of106A(b)3
posted limit between
16 & 30 km/hr inclusive
Speeding in excess of106A(c)4
posted limit by 31 km/hr
or more
Failing to yield to a125(1), 125(2)4
pedestrian
Failing to obey a traffic107B4
control person
Failing to obey traffic83(2), 93(2),2
signs or signals or yield122, 132, 133,
right of way134
Driving to the left of110, 115(1)(b),2
centre line115(1)(c), 115(2)
Operating motor vehicle1812
without adequate brakes
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceConvictionSection(s)Violated
Number
of Points
Offences involving the70, 70A, 70B,2
use of a motor vehicle75(5), 107, 111,
in motion under the112, 117, 118,
following sections119, 120, 123,
164, 165, 169(2),
175(2), 175(3),
175(4), 178, 185
This table shows how the assignment of points would
affect you.
+
WarningInterview6-month
Lettersuspension
Learner’s2 points4 points
Stage
Newly246
Licensed
Driver’s
Licence
All Others4610
+
If you are required to come in for an interview with a
driver enhancement officer, you will be fully tested again,
including a road test.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Your
Driver’s
Probationary licenceLicence1
If your driver’s licence has been suspended because you
have accumulated too many demerit points, then you will
be issued a probationary licence once the suspension is over.
The probationary licence will last for one year from your
date of application. If during the life of the probationary
licence you receive three new demerit points, then your
licence will be suspended for a further six months.
Removing demerit points from your
driving record
If you are an experienced driver (Classes 1-5), you may
have demerit points removed from your driving record by
successfully completing a recognized defensive-driving
course.You must have completed the course within the last
year. The Registrar may deduct up to four points in a five-
year period, depending on your situation. This applies to
points entered and still existing on your driving record at
the time the Registrar makes a decision. Points will not
be deducted if your licence has been suspended, you hold
a probationary licence, or you owe fines. Newly licensed
drivers (Class 5N) and holders of Class 7 or 8 licences are
not eligible for point deduction.
Applying for a conditional
driver’s licence
If your licence has been suspended because of point
accumulation, you may apply to the Registrar for
a conditional driver’s licence. This does not apply if you
are a learner or if you hold a probationary licence. The
conditional driver’s licence allows you to drive at certain
times or in certain places. If you accumulate any points
while on a conditional licence or if you violate the driving
conditions, then your conditional licence will be cancelled.
No further licence will be issued to you until the original
period of suspension has expired.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceTo apply for a conditional driver’s licence, you must submit
non-refundable applicable fees in addition to the applicable
restoration fees.
Applying to have your driver’s
licence restored
To have your licence restored after a suspension, you must
submit a Notice of Application for Restoration and pay the
required fees. You may apply 30 days before the expiry
of your suspension date. You will be notified in writing of
any further action required.
Driver Enhancement
Re-examinations
The Registrar may require that your physical condition
or driving ability be re-examined at any time. This would
normally come about because of a questionable driving
record, due to such things as collisions and convictions.
If a medical condition appears to be contributing to your
driving problems, a medical report may be required.
This medical report may be reviewed by the Medical
Advisory Committee on Driver Licensing and its
recommendation is given to the Registrar.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
Your
Driver’s
Classes of Driver’s LicencesLicence1
LicencePermits the LicenceMinimum
ClassHolder to OperateAge
1• semi-trailer and tractor trailer19
combinations
• all types of vehicles in
Classes 2,3,4,5 and 8 except
school busesClass 1
Example
2• vehicles having a seating capacity19
of more than 24 passengers
• all types of vehicles in
Classes 3,4,5, and 8 except
school buses
Class 2
Example
3• any single vehicle over18
14,000 kg (30,864 lbs) gross vehicle
weight (G.V.W.)
• any combination of vehicles
(other than semi-trailer or
tractor trailer combinations over
14,000 kg) G.V.W. where the
towed vehicle in that combination
does not exceed a G.V.W. of 4,500 kgClass 3
(10,000 lbs)Example
• all types of vehicles in
Classes 4, 5, and 8 except
school buses
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceLicencePermits the LicenceMinimum
ClassHolder to OperateAge
4• buses under 24 passengers18
(except school buses), taxis, and
ambulances
• commercial vans as defined under
the Motor Carrier Act and regulations
• all types of vehicles in Classes 5 and 8
except school buses
• must be at least 19 years of age
to operate a public passenger vehicle
Class 4 Examples
5 and• any single vehicle not exceeding16 with
5N14,000 kg (30,864 lbs) G.V.W.parental
which includes vans havingapproval
a seating capacity of 10 or more
and less than 24
• any combination of vehicles
(other than semi-trailers or tractor
trailer combinations) not exceeding
in combination a G.V.W. of 14,000 kg
(30,864 lbs), and the towed vehicles
in that combination not exceeding
a G.V.W. of 4,500kg (10,000 lbs)
• vehicles in Class 8
Class 5 and 5N
Examples
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
Your
Driver’s
LicencePermits the LicenceMinimumLicence1
ClassHolder to OperateAge
6• motorcycles and motor-driven16 with
cycles and vehicles in Class 8parental
approval
Class 6 Example
7• a learner’s licence is valid only16 with
if the learner is accompanied byparental
an experienced driver (2 yearsapproval
experience and not in the GDL
program) who is a holder of
a Class 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 valid
driver’s licence for the typeClass 7 Example
of vehicle being operated
8• farm tractors14 with
• from age 16 and also validparental
as a Class 7 learner’s licenceapproval
Class 8 Example
All commercial drivers must file a medical report upon initial
application, then upon renewal until the age of 64, and then
annually thereafter.
Road tests must be taken in the correct vehicle type in order
to get appropriate class endorsement.
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
Your
Driver’s
1LicenceEndorsements: Permission to drive
additional vehicles
To show that you are qualified to drive various classes of
vehicles, endorsements are added to your license. A letter
will appear next to the class of license. This letter indicates
which additional classes of vehicles you may operate.
Letters A through E represent the respective vehicle types:
Endorsement (A)valid for any motorcycle
Endorsement (B)valid for school bus
Endorsement (C)valid for motorcycle and school bus
Endorsement (D)valid only for small motorcycle
(engine size 100 cc or less)
Endorsement (E)combination of B&D
To obtain any one of these endorsements, make an
appointment with the Registry of Motor Vehicles, bring
a vehicle and any medical or optical reports (if required),
and successfully complete a written test. You must also pass
a road test in a vehicle for that class.
Conditions or restrictions on
driver licences
Codes can be added to your licence to indicate that certain
conditions or restrictions must be complied with. See some
examples listed below.
(01) corrective lenses (glasses or corrective lenses must
be worn when driving a vehicle)
(02) also valid as a learner’s licence
(03) air brake endorsement (required in order to operate
vehicles with air brakes)
36